{{Infobox software

name = ilastik

developer = Christoph Sommer, Christoph Straehle, Thorben Kröger, Bernhard X. Kausler, Ullrich Koethe, Fred A. Hamprecht, Anna Kreshuk, Dominik Kutra, Stuart Berg, Benedikt Best, Maksim Novikov, Emil Melnikov, Tomaz Vieira and others

released =

latest_release_version = 1.4.1

latest_release_date =

operating_system = Any (Python based)

genre = Image processing & Computer vision & Machine Learning

license = GPL2

website =

}}

ilastik  is free open source software for image classification and segmentation. No previous experience in image processing is required to run the software. Since 2018 ilastik is further developed and maintained by Anna Kreshuk's group at European Molecular Biology Laboratory.

Features

ilastik allows user to annotate an arbitrary number of classes in images with a mouse interface. Using these user annotations and the generic (nonlinear) image features, the user can train a random forest classifier.

Trained ilastik classifiers can be applied new data not included in the training set in ilastik via its batch processing functionality, or without using the graphical user interface, in headless mode. ilastik can be integrated into various related tools:

Pre-trained workflows can be executed directly from ImageJ/Fiji using the ilastik-ImageJ plugin.

Pre-trained ilastik Pixel Classification workflows can be run directly in Python with the ilastik Python package, which is available via conda.

ilastik has a CellProfiler module to use ilastik classifiers to process images within a CellProfiler framework.

History

ilastik was first released in 2011 by scientists at the Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI), University of Heidelberg.

Application

The Interactive Learning and Segmentation Toolkit

Carving

Cell classification and neuron classification

Synapse detection

Cell tracking

Neural Network Classification

Resources

ilastik project is hosted on GitHub. It is a collaborative project, any contributions such as comments, bug reports, bug fixes or code contributions are welcome. The ilastik team can be contacted for user support on the image.sc forum.

References

External links

ImageJ plugin on github

ilastik on forum.image.sc

Category:Image segmentation

Category:Computer vision software

Category:Data mining and machine learning software

Category:Free software programmed in Python