Never-Ending Language Learning system (NELL) is a semantic machine learning system that as of 2010 was being developed by a research team at Carnegie Mellon University, and supported by grants from DARPA, Google, NSF, and CNPq with portions of the system running on a supercomputing cluster provided by Yahoo!.

Process and goals

NELL was programmed by its developers to be able to identify a basic set of fundamental semantic relationships between a few hundred predefined categories of data, such as cities, companies, emotions and sports teams. Since the beginning of 2010, the Carnegie Mellon research team has been running NELL around the clock, sifting through hundreds of millions of web pages looking for connections between the information it already knows and what it finds through its search process &ndash; to make new connections in a manner that is intended to mimic the way humans learn new information. For example, in encountering the word pair "Pikes Peak", NELL would notice that both words are capitalized and deduce from the second word that it was the name of a mountain, and then build on the relationship of words surrounding those two words to deduce other connections. Oren Etzioni of the University of Washington lauded the system's "continuous learning, as if NELL is exercising curiosity on its own, with little human help". Clear errors like these are corrected every few weeks by the members of the research team and the system is allowed to continue its learning process.

As of September 2023, the project's most recently gathered facts dated from February 2019 (according to its Twitter feed) or September 2018 (according to its home page).

Reception

In his 2019 book "Human Compatible", Stuart Russell commented that 'Unfortunately NELL has confidence in only 3 percent of its beliefs and relies on human experts to clean out false or meaningless beliefs on a regular basis—such as its beliefs that “Nepal is a country also known as United States” and "value is an agricultural product that is usually cut into basis."' A 2023 paper commented that "While the never-ending part seems like the right approach, NELL still had the drawback that its focus remained much too grounded on object-language descriptions, and relied on web pages as its only source, which significantly influenced the type of grammar, symbolism, slang, etc. analysed."

See also

Cognitive architecture

Computational models of language acquisition

Cyc

Darwin among the Machines

The Adolescence of P-1

References

External links

Project homepage

Category:Natural language processing software

Category:Data mining and machine learning software