{{Multiple issues|

}}

Picollator is an Internet search engine that performs searches for web sites and multimedia by visual query (image) or text, or a combination of visual query and text. Picollator recognizes objects in the image, obtains their relevance to the text and vice versa, and searches in accordance with all information provided.

Description

Picollator identifies human faces in the images and creates a database of people's faces. This allows the user to search for other images of the submitted person, lookalikes and/or similar images in images found on websites. Picollator can be used in any language.

History

2006  Recogmission LLC developed a desktop application for photo collections management. The system automatically classifies, manages and retrieves photographs stored locally or in corporate databases.

2007  Recogmission started Picollator multimedia search engine project, now in Beta stage.

2008  Picollator.mobi  is launched—a new universal search engine for mobile phones.

2009  Recogmission opens the web based content filter service piFilter.com, which inherited some pattern recognition technologies from Picollator.

Features

Most image search engines match user textual query and picture tags. Picollator is based on a different approach. Patterns and objects found in the image are stored in its database, therefore it is able to recognise the contents of the image and compare it to other images to find similarities.

To search for multimedia information, the user may submit

Sample image to find images with relevant people

Image to find web resources

Text to find images

Text to find web resources

Text and Image to find images and/or web resources.

Company

ru:Recogmission LLC has developed an indexing engine for multimedia information search based on the visual query.

Recogmission develops solutions for multimedia information (image, text and video) indexing and searching on the web and in corporate environments.

References

Picollator Loves My Girlish Smile, Inside the Marketers Studio - David Berkowitz's Marketing Blog . March 20, 2008

Picollator - Image search engine, Phil Bradley's weblog. March 31, 2008

Image-Based Queries, Techpin. March 16, 2008

Picollator: Buscador de rostros, Neoteo

Picollator Online Search, buscador de caras dentro de las imágenes online, Genbeta . March 26, 2008

Picollator:基于脸部特征的图片搜索引擎, 天涯海阁

Picollator - Gesichter suchen mit Bildvorlagen, @-web Suchmaschinen Weblog. July 21, 2008

Picollator Launches New Web Search System, TMCnet.com . July 15, 2008

Picollator sucht Menschen mithilfe von Gesichtserkennung, Internet World Business . July 22, 2008

Sketch based query for image retrieval, Kmvirtual . May 30, 2008

Picollator - текстовый или визуальный поиск?, Стартаперы.ru

Picollator ищет похожих людей, Новости Медиа Атлас . March 3, 2008

Picollator - Οπτική αναζήτηση… περίπου :), Internetakias.gr . April 7, 2008

Доступны мультимедийные запросы в новой поисковой системе Picollator, ITua.info. March 14, 2008

Как найти человека по рисунку лица?, Newsland

Всевидящее око онлайна, Игромания. July, 2008

Microsoft поднимет долю программ в ВВП, OSP.ru July 1, 2008

Система поиска по мультимедийным запросам, Мониторинг Интернета. April 7, 2008

В Рунете запущена система мультимедийного поиска Picollator.ru, Elvisti.com. April 13, 2008

Мультимедийный поиск становится интеллектуальным, Rocit.ru . July 2, 2008

В Рунете появилась система поиска похожих картинок, Eplus.com.ua . March 11, 2008

Ресурсы в сети можно искать с помощью изображений, Commcenter.ru. March 29, 2008

Category:Facial recognition software

Category:Data mining and machine learning software

Category:Internet search engines