{{Infobox software

logo = OpenAI Sora icon.png

logo size = 130px

screenshot size = 300px

caption = Compilation video showcasing Sora 2 in various styles, October 2025

developer = OpenAI

genre = Text-to-video model

website =

released =

latest release version = Sora 2 ()

platform = OpenAI

}}

Sora is a text-to-video model and social media app developed by OpenAI. The model generates short video clips based on prompts, and can also extend existing short videos. In February 2024, OpenAI previewed examples of its output to the public, with the first generation of Sora released publicly for ChatGPT Plus and ChatGPT Pro users in the US and Canada in December 2024, and the second generation, called Sora 2, was released to select users in the US and Canada at the end of September 2025.

By default, the generator uses copyrighted material in its videos (unless copyright holders actively opt-out of having their content included), and videos contain a visible, moving digital watermark to prevent misuse. However, only a week after Sora 2's release, third-party programs became prevalent which could remove the watermark.

History

Several other text-to-video generating models had been created prior to Sora, including Meta's Make-A-Video, Runway's Gen-2, and Google's Veo 3, the last of which,  is also still in its research phase. OpenAI, the company behind Sora, had released DALL·E 3, the third of its DALL-E text-to-image models, in September 2023.

The team that developed Sora named it after the Japanese word for 'sky' to signify its "limitless creative potential". On February 15, 2024, OpenAI first previewed Sora by releasing multiple clips of high-definition videos that it created, including an SUV driving down a mountain road, an animation of a "short fluffy monster" next to a candle, two people walking through Tokyo in the snow, and fake historical footage of the California gold rush, and stated that it was able to generate videos up to one minute long. In February 2025, OpenAI announced plans to integrate Sora into ChatGPT by letting users generate Sora videos from the chatbot.

Sora 2 was unveiled on September 30, 2025, with an iOS app at the same time, as well as an Android app at two months later. All videos generated by the model feature a visible, moving watermark to prevent misuse behaviors of the tool. The previous version of Sora also used a safety watermark to let the audience distinguish between real and fictional content. Only 7 days later, on October 7, 2025, 404 Media reported that third-party programs which successfully removed the compulsory watermark from Sora 2 videos had become prevalent.

By default, the generator uses copyrighted material in its videos unless copyright holders actively opt-out of having their content included.

Some internet users and online content creators, such as Hank Green, have called the mobile app "SlopTok", a reference to both the popular mobile app TikTok and the popular term AI slop. Many outlets, such as WIRED Magazine, have noted that the Sora 2 app is overtly similar to TikTok in style and features.

Legal regulation

Intellectual property

In November 2024, an API key for Sora access was leaked by a group of testers on Hugging Face, who posted a manifesto stating that they were protesting that Sora was used for "art washing". OpenAI revoked all access three hours after the leak was made public, and stated that "hundreds of artists" have shaped the development, and that "participation is voluntary."

On its launch, Sora 2 allowed copyrighted content by default, unless copyright holders were to contact OpenAI and opt-out of the generation of their content on the platform.   On October 3, 2025, OpenAI stated that a future update to Sora 2 would give copyright holders "more granular control" over the generation of copyrighted content, though OpenAI did not state if existing content would be removed. On October 6, the chairman of the MPA criticized OpenAI's approach to copyright on Sora 2.

On December 11, 2025, The Walt Disney Company announced that they will invest $1 billion in OpenAI to allow users to generate more than 200 of its copyrighted characters on Sora 2. These characters include those from Disney Animation, Pixar, Marvel Studios, and Star Wars.

Capabilities and limitations

The technology behind Sora is an adaptation of the technology behind DALL-E 3. According to OpenAI, Sora is a diffusion transformer – a denoising latent diffusion model with one Transformer as the denoiser. A video is generated in latent space by denoising 3D "patches", then transformed to standard space by a video decompressor. Re-captioning is used to augment training data, by using a video-to-text model to create detailed captions on videos.

OpenAI trained the model using publicly available videos as well as copyrighted videos licensed for the purpose, but did not reveal the number or the exact source of the videos. One example shows a group of wolf pups seemingly multiplying and converging, creating a hard-to-follow scenario. OpenAI also stated that, in adherence to the company's existing safety practices, Sora will restrict text prompts for sexual, violent, hateful, or celebrity imagery, as well as content featuring pre-existing intellectual property.

2025

In October 2025, The New York Times remarked that the release of the Sora 2 app in September 2025 was "jaw-dropping (for better and worse)" though also remarked that the app was a "social network in disguise" and "the type of product that companies like Meta and X have sought to build: a way to bring A.I. to the masses that people can share." The article expressed concern regarding the product's potential impact on society and its potential use to promote misinformation, disinformation, and scams.

OpenAI came under controversy over character generation after Sora 2 produced several videos that featured copyrighted characters. The company stated it would work with rights holders to block characters from Sora at their request, giving copyright holders more control. In October 2025, Japan's Content Overseas Distribution Association submitted a request to OpenAI demanding that it stop using the copyrighted content of its member companies, including Studio Ghibli and Square Enix.

Various estates of celebrities have threatened legal action against OpenAI's Sora 2 app, due to deepfake videos being created of their likeness, including celebrities that have passed away. Family members of the late comedians Robin Williams and George Carlin also urged OpenAI to take action against "hurtful videos" and to restrict deepfakes of their loved ones. OpenAI restricted users from making videos of the late Martin Luther King Jr. and gave estates the ability to opt out of those they represent.

In popular culture

The episode of an American animated sitcom South Park "Sora Not Sorry" is a satire that critiques AI deepfake videos and copyright issues surrounding generative AI models with the title being a reference to Sora.

See also

Google Veo

Runway

Dream Machine (text-to-video model)

References

External links

Official website of Sora 2

Sora 2 System Card

Launching Sora responsibly

Category:Articles containing video clips

Category:OpenAI

Category:Applications of artificial intelligence

Category:2024 software

Category:Video processing

Category:Film and video technology

Category:Text-to-video generation

Category:Generative artificial intelligence

Category:2024 in artificial intelligence