{{Infobox scientist

name              = Bidyut Baran Chaudhuri

native_name       =

image             = Bbc2015.jpg

caption           = Chaudhuri in ISI at his Office, 2015

birth_date        =

nationality       = Indian

field             = Computer science

work_institution  = Indian Statistical Institute

alma_mater        =

doctoral_advisor  =

doctoral_students =

known_for         =

website           =

prizes            =

}}

Bidyut Baran Chaudhuri (B. B. Chauduri) is a senior computer scientist and an emeritus professor of Techno India University in West Bengal, India. He is also adjuncted to Indian Statistical Institute, where he was a professor for about three decades. He was the founding Head of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Unit (which was established in 1994) of ISI. Moreover, he was a J.C. Bose Fellow and Indian National Academy of Engineering Distinguished Professor at ISI.

He was the vice-president of the Society for Natural Language Technology Research (SNLTR).

His primary research contributes to the fields of computer vision, image processing and pattern recognition. He is a pioneer of "Indian language script OCR". He has become a Fellow of International Association for Pattern Recognition (IAPR) "for contributions to character recognition and speech synthesis in Indian language". He is also Fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS),

Indian National Science Academy (INSA), Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE), and Institute of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering (IETE). In 2011, Chaudhuri received the Om Prakash Bhasin Award for his contribution in the field of electronics and information technology.

Chaudhuri's interview on some of his works has been reported in Indian newspaper as well.

He is within world's top 2% scientists and top-10 Indian AI scientists according to a study conducted by Stanford University.

He has also been featured as top-10 machine learning researcher from India.

References

External links

ISI Official Homepage (old)

INSA

Books at Amazon

Publications from DBLP

Category:1950 births

Category:Living people

Category:Fellows of the IEEE

Category:Fellows of the International Association for Pattern Recognition

Category:IIT Kanpur alumni

Category:University of Calcutta alumni

Category:Academic staff of the Indian Statistical Institute

Category:Indian computer scientists

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Scientists from Kolkata

Category:Bengali scientists

Category:Fellows of the Indian National Science Academy

Category:Fellows of the National Academy of Sciences, India

Category:Fellows of the Indian National Academy of Engineering

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Om Prakash Bhasin Award recipients