{{Infobox scientist

name = Carol Friedman

image =

image_size =

birth_date =

birth_place =

nationality = American

field = Medical language processingBiomedical InformaticsPharmacovigilanceElectronic medical recordEAV model in EMR

workplaces = Columbia UniversityQueens College, CUNY

academic_advisors = Ralph Grishman

alma_mater = New York University City College of New York

doctoral_students =

notable_students = Yves A. LussierEneida A. Mendonça

known_for = MedLEEMedical language processingGENIES Medical language processing

prizes = AMIA Donald A. B. Lindberg Award for Innovation in Biomedical Informatics, 2010Fellow of the New York Academy of Medicine, 2006Fellow, ACMINational Academy of Medicine (IOM 2016)

}}

Carol Friedman is a scientist and biomedical informatician. She is among the pioneers the use of expert systems in  medical language processing and the explicit medical concept representation underpinning the use of entity–attribute–value modeling underpinning electronic medical records.

Life

Before her doctoral degree, working under the direction of Naomi Sager at New York University, she also contributed to the development of second generation medical language processing systems. After her doctoral degree in computer science (natural language processing) under Dr. Ralph Grishman at the Courant Institute of Mathematics at New York University, she has developed annotative clinical information systems that have been integrated in the New York–Presbyterian Hospital, and the Columbia University Medical Center.

She is recognized for her development, translation to clinical practice and evaluation of the MedLEE respectively). MedLEE and GENIES exemplify the translation to practice of the sub-language theory proposed by Zellig Harris that Friedman pursued. In summary, she has been demonstrating the value of natural language processing for a broad range of clinical and biomedical applications that include decision support, automated encoding, vocabulary development, sub-language grammar applied to biomedicine, clinical research, outcomes analysis, error detection, and genomics research.

Friedman is Professor of Biomedical Informatics at Columbia University. Friedman was a member of the Board of Regents of the National Library of Medicine from 2007 to 2011, and has published over 150 articles.

Publications

References

External links

Category:Living people

Category:United States National Library of Medicine

Category:Health informaticians

Category:New York University alumni

Category:Columbia University faculty

Category:Columbia Medical School faculty

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Place of birth missing (living people)

Category:City College of New York alumni

Category:Members of the National Academy of Medicine

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Data miners