__NOTOC__

{{Infobox scientist

name              = Kathleen McKeown

image             = Impact of Digital Media Across Sectors, Kathy McKeown 29s (cropped).jpg

workplaces        = Columbia University

awards            =

alma_mater        =

thesis_title      = Generating natural language text in response to questions about database structure

thesis_year       = 1982

doctoral_students =

}}

Kathleen R. McKeown is an American computer scientist, specializing in natural language processing. She is currently the Henry and Gertrude Rothschild Professor of Computer Science and is the Founding Director of the Institute for Data Sciences and Engineering at Columbia University.

McKeown received her B.A. from Brown University in 1976 and her PhD in Computer Science in 1982 from the University of Pennsylvania and has spent her career at Columbia. She was the first woman to be tenured in the university's School of Engineering and Applied Science and was the first woman to serve as Chair of the Department of Computer Science, from 1998 to 2003. She has also served as Vice Dean for Research in the School of Engineering and Applied Science.

She has held the positions of President, Vice President, and Secretary-Treasurer of the Association for Computational Linguistics and has been a board member and secretary of the board of the Computing Research Association.

McKeown's research focuses on natural language processing and has included the Newsblaster multi-document summarization program to derive summary news stories from the contents of a number of news sites; for a few years this included multilingual news.

Honors

1985 Presidential Young Investigator Award, National Science Foundation

1991 Faculty Award for Women, National Science Foundation

1994 AAAI Fellow

2003 ACM Fellow

2010 Anita Borg Institute Women of Vision Award in Innovation

2012 Association for Computational Linguistics founding Fellow

2019 Elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences

2022 Elected to the American Philosophical Society

Selected publications

Text Generation: Using Discourse Strategies and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural Language Text. Studies in natural language processing. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University, 1985, 2nd ed. 1992. .

with Ani Nenkova. Automatic Summarization. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 5:2&ndash;3. Hanover, Massachusetts: Now, 2011. .

References

External links

Kathleen McKeown's faculty page at Columbia University

Category:Living people

Category:Columbia School of Engineering and Applied Science faculty

Category:Brown University alumni

Category:University of Pennsylvania alumni

Category:American women computer scientists

Category:American computer scientists

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences

Category:2003 fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery

Category:Fellows of the Association for Computational Linguistics

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Computational linguistics researchers

Category:21st-century American women

Category:Members of the American Philosophical Society

Category:Presidents of the Association for Computational Linguistics