Mark Jerome Steedman (born 18 September 1946) is a British computational linguist and cognitive scientist.

Biography

Steedman graduated from the University of Sussex in 1968, with a B.Sc. in Experimental Psychology, and from the University of Edinburgh in 1973, with a Ph.D. in Artificial Intelligence (Dissertation: The Formal Description of Musical Perception gained in 1972. Advisor: Prof. H.C. Longuet-Higgins FRS).

He has held posts as Lecturer in Psychology, University of Warwick (1977–83); Lecturer and Reader in Computational Linguistics, University of Edinburgh (1983–8); Associate and full Professor in Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania (1988–98). He has held visiting positions at the University of Texas at Austin, the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Radboud University Nijmegen, and the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Steedman currently holds the Chair of Cognitive Science in the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh (1998– ). He works in computational linguistics, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science, on Generation of Meaningful Intonation for Speech by Artificial Agents, Animated Conversation, The Communicative Use of Gesture, Tense and Aspect, and combinatory categorial grammar (CCG). He is also interested in Computational Musical Analysis and combinatory logic.

Distinctions

Member of the Academia Europæa (2006)

Fellow of the British Academy (2002).

Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (2002)

AAAI Fellow (1993)

President elect for 2008 of the Association for Computational Linguistics

Fellow of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2012)

Principal publications

References

External links

Mark Steedman's Home Page

Elected AAAI Fellows

Fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh

ACL Fellows

Category:1946 births

Category:Living people

Category:Fellows of the British Academy

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Alumni of the University of Sussex

Category:Alumni of the University of Edinburgh

Category:Academics of the University of Edinburgh

Category:Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:Fellows of the SSAISB

Category:Members of Academia Europaea

Category:British computer scientists

Category:Linguists from the United Kingdom

Category:Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society

Category:Fellows of the Association for Computational Linguistics

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Computational linguistics researchers

Category:Presidents of the Association for Computational Linguistics