{{Infobox scientist

name        = Pushpak Bhattacharyya

image       = PushpakBhattacharyya.png

birth_date  =

birth_place = Shillong, Assam, India

death_date  =

death_place =

citizenship = India

nationality = Indian

website     =

fields      = Computer science, Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing

workplaces  = IIT PatnaIIT Bombay

alma_mater  = IIT KharagpurIIT KanpurIIT Bombay

known_for   = Director at IIT Patna, Machine translation, Word-sense disambiguation, Sentiment analysis, Psycholinguistics, IndoWordNet, Information Retrieval

}}

Pushpak Bhattacharyya (3 July 1962 – 5 October 2025) was an Indian computer scientist and professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the IIT Bombay. He served as the Director of the IIT Patna from 2015 to 2021.

He was a past President of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2016–17), and held the Vijay and Sita Vashee Chair Professorship at IIT Bombay. Bhattacharyya led the Natural Language Processing (NLP) research group at the Centre for Indian Language Technology (CFILT) at IIT Bombay until his death.

At the inauguration of the Nilekani Centre at AI4Bharat, IIT Madras, Nandan Nilekani, Co-founder and Non-Executive Chairman of Infosys, referred to Bhattacharyya as the "Godfather of Indian NLP".

Early life and education

Bhattacharyya was born in Shillong in 1962. He completed his schooling at Jail Road Boys' High School, Shillong. He obtained a B.Tech. in Computer Science from the IIT Kharagpur, followed by an M.Tech. from the IIT Kanpur, and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from IIT Bombay in 1994.

He authored and co-authored multiple academic works, including Investigations in Computational Sarcasm (with Aditya Joshi), Cognitively Inspired Natural Language Processing: An Investigation Based on Eye Tracking (with Abhijit Mishra), and Machine Translation and Transliteration of Low Resource Related Languages (with Anoop Kunchukuttan).

Over his career, Bhattacharyya published more than 350 research papers in journals and conference proceedings and supervised over 300 undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral students. His projects often addressed computational challenges for Indian languages, such as developing wordnets, building translation systems for low-resource languages, and studying cognitive aspects of language processing.

He also led government- and industry-funded research initiatives supported by organizations including IBM, Microsoft, Yahoo, and the United Nations.

Death

Bhattacharyya died on 5 October 2025, at the age of 63.

VNMM Award, IIT Roorkee, for Technology Development

Eminent Engineer Award, Institution of Engineers (India)

References

External links

Homepage

Google Scholar profile

NPTEL Lectures on NLP

Centre for Indian Language Technology (CFILT)

Category:1962 births

Category:2025 deaths

Category:Indian computer scientists

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:IIT Bombay alumni

Category:Academic staff of the Indian Institutes of Technology

Category:Fellows of the Indian National Academy of Engineering