{{Infobox scientist

name              = Yejin Choi

native_name       = 최예진

native_name_lang  = ko

image             = File:Yejin Choi © John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation–used with permission.jpg

caption           = © John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation–used with permission.

birth_date        = |

birth_place       = South Korea

alma_mater        = Seoul National University (BS)Cornell University (PhD)

workplaces        = University of WashingtonStony Brook University

thesis_title      = Fine-grained opinion analysis : structure-aware approaches

thesis_url        = https://ecommons.cornell.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/ab091269-9e69-4ac1-ab10-075740fab0ba/content

thesis_year       = 2010

doctoral_advisor  = Claire Cardie

prizes            = MacArthur Fellow (2022)

website           =

module            =

}}

Yejin Choi (; born 1977) is the Dieter Schwarz Foundation Professor and Senior Fellow at the Department of Computer Science at Stanford University and the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) respectively. Her research considers natural language processing and computer vision.

Early life and education

Choi is from South Korea. She attended Seoul National University. After earning a bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Choi moved to the United States, where she joined Cornell University as a graduate student. There she worked with Claire Cardie on natural language processing. After earning her doctorate, Choi joined Stony Brook University as an Assistant Professor of Computer Science. At Stony Brook University Choi developed a statistical technique to identify fake hotel reviews.

Research and career

In 2018 Choi joined the Allen Institute for AI. Her research looks to endow computers with a statistical understanding of written language. She became interested in neural networks and their application in artificial intelligence. She started to assemble a knowledge base that became known as the atlas of machine commonsense (ATOMIC). By the time she had finished the creation of ATOMIC, the language model generative Pre-trained Transformer 2 (GPT-2) had been released. ATOMIC does not make use of linguistic rules, but combines the representations of different languages within a neural network. For example, one study demonstrated that female film characters are portrayed as less powerful than their male counterparts. Choi is also a scientific advisor to French research group Kyutai which is being funded by Xavier Niel, Rodolphe Saadé, Eric Schmidt, and others.

In 2025, Stanford HAI announced the appointment of Choi as senior fellow and the Dieter Schwarz Foundation HAI Professor and Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University.

Awards and honours

2013 International Conference on Computer Vision Marr Prize

2016 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers AI One to Watch

2018 Anita Borg Early Career Award

2021 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Outstanding Paper Award

2021 Association for Computational Linguistics Test-of-time Paper Award

2021 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Longuet-Higgins Prize

2022 North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics Best Paper Award

2022 International Conference on Machine Learning Outstanding Paper Award

2022 MacArthur Fellowship

2023 Association for Computational Linguistics Best Paper Award

2023 TIME100 AI 2023

2023 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing Outstanding Paper Award

2025 Association for Computational Linguistics Outstanding Paper Award

2025 Association for Computational Linguistics Best Demo Paper Award

2025 TIME100 AI 2025

Select publications

References

Category:Living people

Category:MacArthur Fellows

Category:South Korean women computer scientists

Category:South Korean computer scientists

Category:21st-century South Korean women scientists

Category:Seoul National University alumni

Category:Cornell University alumni

Category:Stony Brook University faculty

Category:University of Washington Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering faculty

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Fellows of the Association for Computational Linguistics

Category:21st-century South Korean scientists

Category:1977 births