Google Neural Machine Translation (GNMT) was a neural machine translation (NMT) system developed by Google and introduced in November 2016 that used an artificial neural network to increase fluency and accuracy in Google Translate. The neural network consisted of two main blocks, an encoder and a decoder, both of LSTM architecture with 8 1024-wide layers each and a simple 1-layer 1024-wide feedforward attention mechanism connecting them. The total number of parameters has been variously described as over 160 million, approximately 210 million, 278 million or 380 million. It used WordPiece tokenizer, and beam search decoding strategy. It ran on Tensor Processing Units.

By 2020, the system had been replaced by another deep learning system based on a Transformer encoder and an RNN decoder.

GNMT improved on the quality of translation by applying an example-based (EBMT) machine translation method in which the system learns from millions of examples of language translation.

History

The Google Brain project was established in 2011 in the "secretive Google X research lab" Ng's work has led to some of the biggest breakthroughs at Google and Stanford.

In November 2016, Google Neural Machine Translation system (GNMT) was introduced. Since then, Google Translate began using neural machine translation (NMT) in preference to its previous statistical methods (SMT) which had been used since October 2007, with its proprietary, in-house SMT technology.

Training GNMT was a big effort at the time and took, by a 2018 OpenAI estimate, on the order of 79 petaFLOP-days (or 7e21 FLOPs) of compute which was 1.5 orders of magnitude larger than Seq2seq model of 2014 (but about 2x smaller than GPT-J-6B in 2021).

Google Translate's NMT system uses a large artificial neural network capable of deep learning. The new translation engine was first enabled for eight languages: to and from English and French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Turkish in November 2016. In March 2017, three additional languages were enabled: Russian, Hindi and Vietnamese along with Thai for which support was added later. Support for Hebrew and Arabic was also added with help from the Google Translate Community in the same month. In mid April 2017 Google Netherlands announced support for Dutch and other European languages related to English. Further support was added for nine Indian languages: Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, Gujarati, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Kannada at the end of April 2017.

By 2020, Google had changed methodology to use a different neural network system based on transformers, and had phased out NMT.

Evaluation

The GNMT system was said to represent an improvement over the former Google Translate in that it will be able to handle "zero-shot translation", that is it directly translates one language into another. For example, it might be trained just for Japanese-English and Korean-English translation, but can perform Japanese-Korean translation. The system appears to have learned to produce a language-independent intermediate representation of language (an "interlingua"), which allows it to perform zero-shot translation by converting from and to the interlingua.

Languages supported by GNMT

As of December 2021, all of the languages of Google Translate support GNMT, with Latin being the most recent addition.

Afrikaans

Albanian

Amharic

Arabic

Armenian

Azerbaijani

Basque

Belarusian

Bengali

Bosnian

Bulgarian

Burmese

Catalan

Cebuano

Chewa

Chinese (Simplified)

Chinese (Traditional)

Corsican

Croatian

Czech

Danish

Dutch

English

Esperanto

Estonian

Filipino (Tagalog)

Finnish

French

Galician

Georgian

German

Greek

Gujarati

Haitian Creole

Hausa

Hawaiian

Hebrew

Hindi

Hmong

Hungarian

Icelandic

Igbo

Indonesian

Irish

Italian

Japanese

Javanese

Kannada

Kazakh

Khmer

Kinyarwanda

Korean

Kurdish (Kurmanji)

Kyrgyz

Lao

Latin

Latvian

Lithuanian

Luxembourgish

Macedonian

Malagasy

Malay

Malayalam

Maltese

Maori

Marathi

Mongolian

Nepali

Norwegian (Bokmål)

Odia

Pashto

Persian

Polish

Portuguese

Punjabi (Gurmukhi)

Romanian

Russian

Samoan

Scottish Gaelic

Serbian

Shona

Sindhi

Sinhala

Slovak

Slovenian

Somali

Sotho

Spanish

Sundanese

Swahili

Swedish

Tajik

Tamil

Tatar

Telugu

Thai

Turkish

Turkmen

Ukrainian

Urdu

Uyghur

Uzbek

Vietnamese

Welsh

West Frisian

Xhosa

Yiddish

Yoruba

Zulu

See also

Example-based machine translation

Rule-based machine translation

Comparison of machine translation applications

Statistical machine translation

Artificial intelligence

Cache language model

Computational linguistics

Computer-assisted translation

History of machine translation

List of emerging technologies

List of research laboratories for machine translation

Neural machine translation

Machine translation

Universal translator

References

External links

Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation

The Advantages and Disadvantages of Machine Translation

Statistical Machine Translation

International Association for Machine Translation (IAMT)

Machine Translation Archive  by John Hutchins. An electronic repository (and bibliography) of articles, books and papers in the field of machine translation and computer-based translation technology

Machine translation (computer-based translation) – Publications by John Hutchins (includes PDFs of several books on machine translation)

Category:Applications of artificial intelligence

Category:Computational linguistics

Category:Machine translation

Category:Artificial neural networks

Category:Tasks of natural language processing

Category:Google Translate