channel TrumporBiden2024]]

As artificial intelligence (AI) has become more mainstream, there is growing concern about how this will influence elections. Potential targets of AI include election processes, election offices, election officials and election vendors.

Tactics

Generative AI capabilities allow creation of misleading content. Examples of this include text-to-video, deepfake videos, text-to-image, AI-altered image, text-to-speech, voice cloning, and text-to-text. In the context of an election, a deepfake video of a candidate may propagate information that the candidate does not endorse. Chatbots could spread misinformation related to election locations, times or voting methods. In contrast to malicious actors in the past, these techniques require little technical skill and can spread rapidly.

Usage by country

Argentina

2023 elections

During the 2023 Argentine primary elections, Javier Milei's team distributed AI generated images including a fabricated image of his rival Sergio Massa and drew 3 million views. The team also created an unofficial Instagram account entitled "AI for the Homeland."

Bangladesh

2024 elections

In the run up to the 2024 Bangladeshi general election, deepfake videos of female opposition politicians appeared. Rumin Farhana was pictured in a bikini while Nipun Ray was shown in a swimming pool. India, Pakistan and Iran are all expected  to make efforts to subvert the national vote using disinformation campaigns to deceive voters and sway diaspora communities.

In a report by the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security called "Cyber Threats to Canada's Democratic Process: 2025 Update", it states that malicious actors including China and Russia: "are most likely to use generative Al as a means of creating and spreading disinformation, designed to sow division among Canadians and push narratives conducive to the interests of foreign states".

France

2024 elections

In the 2024 French legislative election, deepfake videos appeared claiming: i) That they showed the family of Marine le Pen. In the videos, young women, supposedly Le Pen's nieces, are seen skiing, dancing and at the beach "while making fun of France’s racial minorities": However, the family members don't exist. On social media there were over 2 million views. ii) In a video seen on social media, a deepfake video of a France24 broadcast appeared to report that the Ukrainian leadership had "tried to lure French president Emmanuel Macron to Ukraine to assassinate him and then blame his death on Russia".

Ghana

2024 elections

During the months before the December 2024 Ghanaian general election, a network of at least 171 fake accounts has been used to spam social media. Posts have been used by a group identified as "@TheTPatriots" to promote the New Patriotic Party, although it is not known whether the two are connected. A video The All-India Anna Dravidian Progressive Federation party posted showed an audio clip of Jayaram Jayalalithaa even though she had died in 2016. The Deepfakes Analysis Unit (DAU) is an open source platform created in March 2024 for the public to share misleading content and assess if it had been AI-generated.

AI was also used to translate political speeches in real time. The Indonesian Children's Protection Commission condemned these ads, labeling them as a form of misuse. Other candidates, Anies Baswedan and Ganjar Pranowo, also incorporated AI art into their campaigns. Throughout the election period, all presidential candidates faced assaults from deepfakes, both in video and audio formats.

Ireland

2024 elections

In the last weeks of the 2024 Irish general election a spoof election poster appeared in Dublin featuring "an AI-generated candidate with three arms". The candidate is called Aidan Irwin, but no-one stood in the election with that name. A slogan on the poster says "put matters into artificial intelligence’s hands". After confirming that the images were faked, a party spokesperson said that it was "an innovative way to drive our social media".

i) An AI generated audio of his voice was added to a video clip and was broadcast at a virtual rally. i)  A deepfaked video of Joe Biden emerged on social media showing him saying that "The U.S. would place sanctions on SA and declare it an enemy state if the African National Congress (ANC) won".

2024 elections

Deepfakes were used to spread misinformation before the 2024 South Korean legislative election with one source reporting 129 deepfake violations of election laws within a two week period.

Seoul hosted the 2024 Summit for Democracy, a virtual gathering of world leaders initiated by US President Joe Biden in 2021. The focus of the summit was on digital threats to democracy including artificial intelligence and deepfakes.

Taiwan

2024 elections

AI-generated content was used during the 2024 Taiwanese presidential election. Among the media were: i) A deepfake video of General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping which showed him supporting the presidential elections. Created on social media, the video was "widely circulated" and often "accompanied by claims that Xi supported candidates from one of the two opposition parties". ii) In a deepfake video U.S. congressman Rob Wittman is shown appearing to support Taiwan's Democratic Progressive Party. The video shows him saying that the U.S. would increase its military support, accelerating "all arms sales to Taiwan." It was shown on various social media platforms.

United Kingdom

2024 elections

The Centre for Emerging Technology and Security provided a report on the threat of AI to the 2024 UK general election. The reports' findings said that the impact of AI was limited but may damage the democratic system.

In the run up to the UK 2024 general elections, AI-generated videos spread extensively on social media including: i) A deepfake video showed then PM Rishi Sunak claiming that he would "require 18-year-olds to be sent to active war zones in Gaza and Ukraine as part of their national service". The video had more than 400,00 views. ii) A deepfake video showed PM Keir Starmer "swearing repeatedly at a staffer". Comments from the original poster included calling Starmer a "disgusting bully". The social media site showing the video refused to delete it despite requests.

Entrepreneur Steve Endacott from the south of England created "AI Steve," an AI avatar as the face of his campaign for member of parliament.

United States

2024 elections

Officials from the ODNI and FBI have stated that Russia, Iran, and China used generative artificial intelligence tools to create fake and divisive text, photos, video, and audio content to foster anti-Americanism and engage in covert influence campaigns. The use of artificial intelligence was described as an accelerant rather than a revolutionary change to influence efforts. Regulation of AI with regard to elections was unlikely to see a resolution for most of the 2024 United States general election season.

The campaign for the 2024 Republican nominee, Donald Trump, has used deepfake videos of political opponents in campaign ads and fake images showing Trump with black supporters. In 2023, while he was still running for re-election, the presidential campaign of Joe Biden prepared a task force to respond to AI images and videos.

A Democratic consultant working for Dean Phillips also admitted to using AI to generate a robocall which used Joe Biden's voice to discourage voter participation.

Generative AI increased the efficiency with which political candidates were able to raise money by analyzing donor data and identifying possible donors and target audiences.

Regulation

By governments

Philippines

The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) issued guidelines on the usage of AI, to be implemented starting from the 2025 Philippine general election including the parallel Bangsamoro Parliament election. It mandates candidate to disclose usage of AI in their campaign materials and prohibits the usage of the technology to spread misinformation against their rivals. This is the first time the COMELEC has release guidelines on campaigning through social media.

United States

US states have attempted regulation of AI use in elections and campaigns with varying degrees of success. The National Conference of State Legislatures has compiled a list of legislation regarding AI use by state as of 2024, some carrying both civil and criminal penalties. Oregon Senate Bill 1571 requires that campaign communications in Oregon disclose the use of AI.  California has enacted legislation that makes using deepfakes to discredit political opponents illegal within sixty days of an election.

Self-regulation by private firms

Midjourney, an AI image-generator, has started blocking users from creating fake images of the 2024 US Presidential candidates. Research from the Center for Countering Digital Hate found that image generators such as Midjourney, ChatGPT Plus, DreamStudio, and Microsoft's Image Creator create images that constitute election disinformation in 41% of the test text prompts they tried.

AI use in election interference by foreign governments

AI has begun to be used in election interference by foreign governments. Governments thought to be using AI to interfere in external elections include Russia, Iran and China.

Outside of the US elections, a deepfake video of Moldova’s pro-Western president Maia Sandu  shows her "throwing her support behind a political party friendly to Russia." Campaigns have used AI in a number of ways, including speech writing, fundraising, voter behaviour prediction, fake robocalls and the generation of fake news. Its use by politicians and political parties for "purposes that are not overtly malicious" can also raise ethical worries. These platforms are part of complex and opaque systems which can result in a "significant impact on freedom of expression", with the generalisation of AI in campaigns also creating huge pressures on "voters’ mental security". As the frequency of AI use in political campaigning becomes common, together with globalization, more 'universalized' content can be used so that territorial boundaries matter less. While AI collides with the reasoning processes of people, the creation of "dangerous behaviours" can happen which disrupt important levels of society and nation states.

See also

Chinese interference in the 2024 United States elections

Deepfake

List of elections in 2025

Russian interference in the 2024 United States elections

References

External links

"Smashing Security: Keeping the lights on after a ransomware attack" - podcast including discussion on the use of AI in the Indian elections (17m37s - 29m11s). 25 April 2024.

Elections

Category:Anti-AI sentiment

Category:Artificial intelligence

Category:Deepfakes

Category:Election controversies

Category:Political campaigning

Category:Wikipedia Student Program