{{Infobox summit meeting|name=2025 AI Action Summit|image=File:President_of_France_Mr._Emmanuel_Macron_welcomes_Prime_Minister_of_Bharat_Shri_Narendra_Damodardas_Modi_at_the_AI_Action_Summit_in_France.jpg|caption=President Macron of France with Prime Minister Modi of India|logo=File:Logo_Sommet_pour_l'action_sur_l'intelligence_artificielle.svg|date=10–11 February 2025|country=France|venues=Grand Palais, Paris|URL=}}

The Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Summit (French: Sommet pour l'action sur l'intelligence artificielle or Sommet pour l'action sur l'IA, SAIA) was held at the Grand Palais in Paris, France, from 10 to 11 February 2025. The summit was co-chaired by French President Emmanuel Macron and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.  The 2025 AI Action Summit followed the 2023 AI Safety Summit hosted at Bletchley Park in the UK, and the 2024 AI Seoul Summit in South Korea. This series of AI summits will continue with the AI Impact Summit in Delhi to be hosted by India in February 2026.

Whereas the 2023 AI Safety Summit was attended by representatives from 29 governments and executives from only a handful of AI companies, over 1,000 participants from more than 100 countries attended the 2025 Paris AI Summit, representing government leaders, international organisations, the academic and research community, the private sector, and civil society. Commissioned after the Bletchley Park AI Safety Summit, the report focused on the risks and threats posed by general-purpose AI, and was slated for discussion at the Paris summit as part of the "Trust in AI" pillar. In the weeks leading up to the Paris summit, government leaders had also started to rally around "national champions" in AI, partly in response to Chinese AI startup DeepSeek, which had released a new model rivalling OpenAI o1.

On Sunday 9 February, French President Emmanuel Macron posted a compilation of AI-generated deepfake video clips of himself on Instagram to help publicise the start of the 2025 AI Action Summit the following day. While acknowledging the humour of the deepfakes, the real Macron states in the video that using artificial intelligence, "we can do some very big things: change healthcare, energy, life in our society".

Google CEO Sundar Pichai said in his speech that while the rise of AI brings many risks, "The biggest risk is missing out". He discussed Google's long track record of AI research and said that the company is investing further into "deep research" agents that can autonomously search the Internet and compile a full analysis for users.

In his speech closing the first day, President Emmanuel Macron emphasized that France has the capability to deliver the power required by AI companies, thanks to its production of nuclear energy. While declaring that Europe was "back in the race" for AI, Macron said that the region was "too slow" for investors, and called on the EU to "simplify regulation" and "resynchronize with the rest of the world". Launched by President Macron, Current AI is backed by nine governments – Finland, France, Germany, Chile, India, Kenya, Morocco, Nigeria, Slovenia, and Switzerland – plus various philanthropic organisations such as the Omidyar Group and the McGovern Foundation, and private companies such as Google and Salesforce.

Another initiative launched at the summit was the Coalition for Sustainable AI. Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India stressed the need to "democratise technology" and "[ensure] access to all, especially in the Global South".

Vice President JD Vance of the United States used his speech to warn against "excessive regulation of the AI" which "could kill a transformative sector just as it's taking off". Vance also warned other leaders against cooperating with "authoritarian regimes" on AI, a comment widely interpreted as a reference to China.

Investments

At the summit, the European Union made several announcements related to planned investments supporting AI development.

In addition, a coalition of more than 60 European companies launched the EU AI Champions Initiative. Financing of between €30 and €50 billion is expected from the United Arab Emirates to build a very large data centre campus, with another €20 billion from the Canadian investment firm Brookfield Corporation.

French startup Mistral AI and Helsing, a German-British company, announced their partnership in developing vision-language-action models helping soldiers use AI on the battlefield.

Reactions

The Financial Times editorial board noted that the Paris summit "highlighted a shift in the dynamics towards geopolitical competition", which it characterised as "a new AI arms race" between the US and China, with Europe "trying to carve out its role".

Fortune.com AI editor Jeremy Kahn described the 2025 Paris Summit as an "AI festival, complete with glitzy corporate side events and even a late night dance party", contrasting it with the "decidedly sober" mood of the inaugural AI Safety Summit at Bletchley Park. Others voicing similar concerns included David Leslie of the Alan Turing Institute and Max Tegmark of the Future of Life Institute.

Statement on inclusive and sustainable AI

At the summit, 58 countries, including France, China, and India, signed a joint declaration, the Statement on Inclusive and Sustainable Artificial Intelligence for People and the Planet. The statement outlines general principles such as accessibility and overcoming the digital divide; developing AI that is open, transparent, ethical, safe, and trustworthy; avoiding market concentration of AI development to encourage innovation;  positive outcomes for labour markets; making AI sustainable; and promoting international cooperation and governance.

Armenia

Australia

Austria

Belgium

Brazil

Bulgaria

Cambodia

Canada

Chile

China

Croatia

Cyprus

Czechia

Denmark

Djibouti

Estonia

Finland

France

Germany

Greece

Hungary

India

Indonesia

Ireland

Italy

Japan

Kazakhstan

Kenya

Latvia

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Malta

Mexico

Monaco

Morocco

New Zealand

Nigeria

Norway

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Rwanda

Senegal

Serbia

Singapore

Slovakia

Slovenia

South Africa

South Korea

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

Thailand

Netherlands

United Arab Emirates

Ukraine

Uruguay

Vatican

Additional signatories included the following international bodies and research institutes:

ALAI (Latin American Association on Internet)

African Union (AU) Commission

BEUC The European Consumer Organisation

Center for Democracy and Technology

Council of Europe

European Commission (and the 27 member states)

Hugging Face

INRIA

Institute of Advanced Study

OECD

Partnership on AI

PMIA

Sciences Po

UN

UNESCO

References

Category:Artificial intelligence conferences

Category:February 2025 in France

Category:2025 in artificial intelligence

External links

Artificial Intelligence Action Summit