{{Infobox summit meeting

name=2024 AI Seoul Summit

other_titles=

image=

caption=

country=South Korea and the United Kingdom

date= May 21–22, 2024

participants=

URL=

keypoints=

}}

The 2024 AI Seoul Summit was co-hosted by the South Korean and British governments. The Seoul Declaration was adopted to address artificial intelligence technology and related challenges and opportunities.

Background

The AI Seoul Summit is the second such meeting following the AI Safety Summit held in the United Kingdom in November 2023. In the Bletchley Declaration, the participating countries agreed to prioritize identifying AI safety risks of shared concern, a shared concern, but at the Seoul Summit, the leaders also recognized the importance of AI.

Notable attendees

The summit was attended by the leaders of Group of Seven countries, including the United States, Canada, France, and Germany, South Korea, Singapore and Australia, representatives of the United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and the European Union. He also expressed his intention to strengthen cooperation for the development of international standards.

Outcomes

Seoul Declaration for Safe, Innovative and Inclusive AI

The Seoul Declaration was adopted at the summit by leaders representing the EU, the US, the UK, Australia, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. The declaration is a commitment to foster international cooperation to help develop AI governance frameworks that are interoperable between countries, partly by integrating the Hiroshima Process International Code of Conduct for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems. It advocates for the development of human-centric AI in collaboration with the private sector, academia, and civil society. It aims to develop low-power chips as the AI industry rapidly expands and massive consumption is expected.

See also

Artificial Intelligence

Foreign relations of South Korea

AI Action Summit

References

Category:Artificial intelligence conferences

Category:2024 conferences

Category:May 2024 in South Korea

Category:Presidency of Yoon Suk Yeol

Category:Regulation of artificial intelligence