The Artificial Evolution | Evolution Artificielle (EA) conference is a peer-reviewed research conference on evolutionary computation and related areas of natural computing held every two years (until recently in odd-numbered years). It originated in France and every EA conference has been held there until recently (see history below). Proceedings of EA are published by Springer-Verlag in their LNCS series.

Origin

Artificial Evolution was originally initiated as a forum for the French-speaking evolutionary computation community, and the first conference, organized by :fr:Jean-Marc Alliot, Evelyne Lutton, Edmund Ronald and Marc Schoenauer, was held in Toulouse in 1994 under the name Evolution Artificielle. It was, until recently, the only EA conference held in an even year, and the only one with proceedings not published by Springer (they were published by Cepadues).

History

In 1995 The Artificial Evolution Association (L'association Évolution Artificielle) was formed to encourage exchanges and meetings in artificial evolution and evolutionary computation. After the initial meeting in 1994 (see origin above) it has been involved in the organisation of the Artificial Evolution conferences from 1995 to the present day. In addition to the Artificial Evolution conferences it has organised other activities (see Artificial Evolution Association below).

The Artificial Evolution conference became an international conference in 1995 in Brest, under the name Artificial Evolution. Due to its strong relevance for the French-speaking research community it is still also described as Evolution Artificielle (French for Artificial Evolution) and uses the EA abbreviation on conference websites and in the titles of proceedings volumes. The table below shows where Artificial Evolution conferences have been held and cites their proceedings and websites.

It should not be surprising that conference websites are not usually maintained for the length of time that conference proceedings are available. The table shows the number of the conference proceedings in the Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) series (with the exception of the first conference, see origin above, where the conference proceedings were published elsewhere). The reference to each conference proceedings gives the full title of that volume in the Springer LNCS series. The ISBN of each title is to the paperback volume, an eBook is also available by purchase or subscription.

Format

Artificial Evolution conferences are single-track conferences taking place over three days (as the program of AE 2024 in Bordeaux in diagram form shows), to enable substantial engagement between participants.

Although all Artificial Evolution conferences have been organised from France, and from 1995 by the Artificial Evolution Association, itself based in France, all presentations are in English, the lingua franca of the modern computer science research community.

Papers submitted to the conference are peer-reviewed, and the resulting papers are available in the conference proceedings available at the conference. A selection of the best papers from each conference are edited into a volume of the Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, across Artificial Evolution conferences by extracting articles from the Artificial Evolution conference proceedings between 1995 and 2017 using the DBLP computer science bibliography. The collaboration network shows clusters of collaboration around French computer scientists. It also shows collaboration between French computer scientists (for example Evelyne Luttion) and British computer scientists (Edmund Burke and Gabriela Ochoa). Further afield, collaborations have involved Darell Whitley (Colorado State University), Thomas Baeck (Leiden University) and Thomas Stützle (Universite Libre de Bruxelles) as well as others.

Clearly Artificial Evolution conferences cannot compete with the much larger evolutionary computation conferences (GECCO or IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation) in the number of presentations that can be covered in one conference, nor in the number of potential attendees. But at a smaller conference, the majority of attendees will watch each presentation, and any attendee at the conference will find it easier to talk with other attendees at the conference.

Alternative conferences

Other European conferences covering similar disciplines include EvoStar (comprising the four conferences EuroGP, EvoApplications, EvoCOP and EvoMUSART) and Parallel Problem Solving from Nature (PPSN).

The Foundations of Genetic Algorithms workshops (FOGA), actually a conference rather than a workshop, and devoted to the theoretical basis of all evolutionary algorithms and related heuristics rather than just genetic algorithms has been held in European locations as well as other international locations.

The Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO) originated in the United States and many successive instances of that conference have been held there. Nevertheless, a number have been held in European locations, being linkely to attract similar professional interest from researchers as the Artificial Evolution conference and the other conferences mentioned above. The GECCO conferences held in Europe to date are mentioned in the table below:

The IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (IEEE CEC) is another conference in the field of evolutionary computation and natural computing. While many IEEE CEC conferences have been held on other continents, some, like GECCO, have been held in Europe. The table below summarises their occurrence:

GECCO, FOGA and Parallel Problem Solving from Nature all received a CORE rank A in that conference ranking system for computer science suggesting their importance to attendees in  evolutionary computation, natural computing and related fields. These are thus probably some suitable alternative research conferences.

Artificial Evolution Association

The Artificial Evolution Association (AEA) was created to organise the Artificial Evolution conferences as described in history above, and it continues in this activity. But as well as organising the conferences, it also organises other activities.

JET days

JET abbreviates in French Journées Évolutionnaires Thématiques (in English Thematic Evolutionary Days), formerly Journées Évolutionnaires Trimestrielles with the same initials. These are day-long meetings informal meetings on artificial evolution, evolutionary computation and related fields. They were held one or more times a year between 1998 and 2016, excepting one instance at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland, always in France. It is not clear whether the lack of meetings after 2016 reflects a lack of updating the website or their cessation.

Mailing list

The AEA maintains a mailing list for people interested in Artificial Evolution. Following the trend of the JET days referred to above, its title is (in French) jet – Personnes interessées par l'Evolution Artificielle en France An approximate translation in English is jet – Persons interested in Artificial Evolution in France. This mailing list appears to be live and thus is likely to have greater reach than the JET days above.

Summer schools

The AEA has supported Summer Schools at different locations across France, designed for a combination of students, researchers and industrial practitioners in the fields that the Artificial Evolution conference and Association cover. These included introductions to the subjects as well as advanced lectures, and practical exercises for application in these field. The AEA has recorded Summer Schools as having taken place annually between 2006 and 2013.

Workshops

The AEA supported a number of workshops, held in Paris, Bordeaux and Luxembourg from 2010 to 2011, in addition to its organisation of the Artificial Evolution conferences and other activities. Details of these workshops are no longer accessible. As of 2025, it is fourteen years since the last recorded workshop supported by the Artificial Evolution Association.

Notes

References

Category:Computer science conferences

Category:Artificial intelligence conferences

Category:Evolutionary computation conferences

Category:Recurring events established in 1994