{{Other uses|AI for Good (disambiguation)AI for Good}}

{{Multiple issues|

}}

{{Infobox recurring event

name             = AI for Good

native_name      =

native_name_lang =

logo             = AI for Good logo 2024 vertical.png

logo_alt         =

logo_caption     = Logo

logo_size        =

image            =

image_size       =

alt              =

caption          =

status           =

genre            =

begins           = 8 July 2025

ends             = 11 July 2025

frequency        =

venue            = Palexpo

location         = Geneva

coordinates      =

country          = Switzerland

years_active     = 7

first            =

founder_name     =

last             = 2024

prev             =

next             =

participants     =

attendance       = 20,000 (2022)

capacity         =

area             =

budget           =

activity         =

leader_name      =

patron           =

organised        = ITU-T

filing           =

people           =

member           =

sponsors         = Swiss Confederation, Deloitte, Technology Innovation Institute, DLA Piper, King Abdulaziz Center for World Culture, Microsoft, China Mobile, Alibaba Group, Amazon Web Services, China Telecom, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications,Ministry of Science and ICT, ZTE, China Unicom, Salesforce, PwC, KUKA, CEIMIA, Huawei, FSAB Consulting, Cisco, Samsung, Gen Digital, Ernst & Young

website          =

current          =

footnotes        =

}}

AI for Good was established in 2017 by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the United Nations (UN) agency for digital technologies. The platform is co-convened with the Government of Switzerland and in partnership UN agencies. Its founding mission is to identify innovative applications of artificial intelligence (AI) to solve global challenges.

AI for Good arose from collaboration between ITU and IBM Watson AI XPRIZE. The first AI for Good Global Summit 2017 was held in Geneva, Switzerland and is since held annually.

Activity

With the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and global shutdowns, AI for Good moved online in March 2020. The platform has 37,000 contributors from more than 180 countries. Since 2023 AI for Good hosts a physical Global Summit in Geneva again annually.

AI for Good has supported Global Initiatives on AI and Data Commons, AI for Health (in partnership with WHO), on Resilience to Natural Hazards through AI Solutions (former ITU/WMO/UNEP Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Natural Disaster Management (FG-AI4NDM)

), AI and Multimedia authenticity standards collaboration (under the World Standards Cooperation), AI for Road Safety (in partnership with UNECE) and pre-standardization focus groups on Artificial Intelligence Native for Telecommunication Networks (FG-AINN), AI and Internet of Things (IoT) for Digital Agriculture (in partnership with FAO), concluded focus groups on AI and Environmental Efficiency, Machine Learning and 5G.

AI for Good is guided by Resolution 214 of the ITU Plenipotentiary Conference, and amplified by Resolution A/78/L.49 of the UN General Assembly. The adoption of Resolution COM4/AI at WTSA-24 describes ITU's mandate and AI for Good's role in AI development.

Global summit 2017

speaking at AI for Good 2017]]

The first AI for Good Global summit took place from 7 to 9 June 2017. Speakers at the event included:

Pedro Domingos

Fei-Fei Li

Gary Marcus

Stuart J. Russell

Jürgen Schmidhuber

António Guterres

Rupert Stadler

Manuela M. Veloso

Peter Norvig

Christopher Fabian

Peter Lee

One of the outcomes of the 2017 Global Summit was the creation of an ITU-T Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G.

Global summit 2018

Director-General Tedros Adhanom (right) and ITU Secretary-General Houlin Zhao (center) ]]

The second AI for Good Global Summit took place from 15 to 17 May 2018 at the ITU headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland and generated 35 AI project proposals. Speakers included:

Roger Penrose

Samantha Cristoforetti

António Guterres

Michael Møller

Wendell Wallach

Aimee Van Wynsberghe

Tedros Adhanom

Mukhisa Kituyi

Bill Peduto

Stuart J. Russell

Thomas Wiegand

Timnit Gebru

Huw Price

Stephen Kelly

H.E. Ahmed Al Theneyan

U.N. Envoy on Youth Jayathma Wickramanayake

Ingmar Weber

Lui Yang

Global summit 2019

The third AI for Good Global Summit took place from 28 May to 31 May, and gave rise to the ITU Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Autonomous and Assisted Driving with several Day 0 workshops and VIP events having taken place on May 27. Some of the speakers included:

Ray Kurzweil

Cedric Villani

Yoshua Bengio

Anousheh Ansari

Yves Daccord

Vladimir Kramnik

Jim Hagemann Snabe

Klaus-Robert Müller

Jean-Philippe Courtois

Amir Ansari

Francis Gury

Petteri Taalas

Houlin Zhao

Soumya Swaminathan

Eileen Donahoe

Vicki Hanson

Francesca Rossi

Ingmar Weber

Jean-Philippe Courtois

2020, 2022

In 2020 the Global Summit was an online-only event. In 2022, the summit moved to the "Neural Network" community platform. Speakers included:

Muhammad Yunus

Shwetak Patel

Yoshua Bengio

Peter Heine Nielsen

Reeps One

Anousheh Ansari

Riane Eisler

Kai-Fu Lee

Regina Barzilay

Thomas Wiegand

Stephen Ibaraki

Nuria Oliver

Barbara Pernici

Taryn Southern

Thomas G. Dietterich

Simon Pierro

Gabriele Kotsis

Emmanuel Faber

Mikko Hyppönen

Francesca Rossi

Davar Ardalan

Iker Casillas

Missy Cummings

Jaan Tallinn

Anja Kaspersen

Caroline Criado-Perez

Stuart J. Russell

Chaesub Lee

Peter Diamandis

Simao Campos

Global Summit 2023

The 2023 AI for Good Global Summit took place on 6 – 7 July in Geneva. The event brought together participants, including government officials, policymakers, industry leaders, academics, scientists, technology innovators, civil society members, and representatives from the UN community. The summit received some publicity due to the large gathering of humanoid robots that occurred, including Ai-Da, Nadine Social Robot, Geminoid, and Sophia.

António Guterres

Doreen Bogdan-Martin

Tomas Lamanauskas

Seizo Onoe

Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus

Amandeep Singh Gill

Lila Ibrahim

Werner Vogels

Yuval Noah Harari

Stuart Russell

Orly Lobel

Ray Kurzweil

Maja Matarić

Wendel Wallach

Alessandra Sala

Gary Marcus

Nicholas Thompson

Bernard Maissen

Babak Hodjat

Ebtesam Almazrouei

Moriba Jah

Baroness Joanna Shields

Juan Lavista Ferres

H.E. Mr. Jürg Lauber

Najat Mokhtar

Hans Keirstead

LJ Rich

Anne Neuberger

Global summit 2024

The 2024 AI for Good Global Summit was held in Geneva on May 30 – 31. The event was attended by leaders from governments, industries, and academia, alongside 10,000 online participants. Highlights included the launch of a unified framework for AI standards by ITU, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), addressing issues like AI watermarking and deepfake detection, and over 400 UN-led AI projects. The Summit also introduced the AI for Good Impact Initiative, aiming to scale AI solutions globally and foster regional engagement through competitions, accelerators, and policy guidance. Demonstrations showcased innovations, including generative AI and mind-controlled robotic prosthetics.

António Guterres

Doreen Bogdan-Martin

Tomas Lamanauskas

Seizo Onoe

Bilel Jamoussi

Geoffrey Hinton

Sam Altman

HRH Princess Beatrice

Stuart Russell

Tristan Harris

Tshilidzi Marwala

Azeem Azhar

Daren Tang

Virginia Dignum

Nicholas Thompson

Alexandre Fasel

Chieko Asakawa

Gita Gopinath

Jim Zemlin

Ebtesam Almazrouei

Anja Kaspersen

Baroness Joanna Shields

Alessandra Sala

Sage Lenier

Pelonomi Moiloa

Anna Koivuniemi

LJ Rich

Le Lu

Global summit 2025

protestors in 2025]]

The 2025 AI for Good Global Summit was held in Geneva on July 8 – 11. It showcased progress on areas including networking, multimedia, energy efficiency, healthcare, food security, and road safety. Just prior to her keynote talk, speaker Abeba Birhane was asked modify her presentation to change mentions of Israel, Palestine, genocide and negative comments regarding technology companies. Birhane subsequently made the original presentation available and highlighted that 45% the centre stage speakers at the conference were from industry with academia and civil-society speakers sharing less than 10%.

Doreen Bogdan-Martin

Guy Parmelin

Werner Vogels

Abeba Birhane

Meredith Whittaker

Kenneth Cukier

Qu Dongyu

will.i.am

Nicholas Thompson

Marc Benioff

Cherie Blair

Bernhard Schölkopf

Yann LeCun

Michele Woods

Sasha Luccioni

Kate Kallot

Anne Bouverot

Outcomes

Machine Learning 5G

The ITU-T Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G Networks (FG-ML5G) was created following discussions at the 2017 AI for Good Global Summit. The FG-ML5G is produced several technology standards in this domain, including Y.3172, Y.3173, Y.3176, which were adopted by ITU-T Study Group 13. The FG-ML5G created the impetus for a new ITU-T Focus Group on Autonomous Networks, which is responsible for i.a. Y.3181.

AI for Health

The 2018 Global Summit led to the creation of the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health with the World Health Organization, which created the AI for Health Framework.

ITU Journal "ICT Discoveries"

The ITU relaunched its Journal ICT Discoveries during the 2018 Global Summit, with the first edition being a special on Artificial Intelligence.

Criticism

Payal Arora criticized AI for Good for its paternalism towards the Global South.

References

External links

Category:Recurring events established in 2017

Category:Recurring events established in 2020

Category:Technology conferences

Category:Business conferences

Category:Artificial intelligence conferences

Category:United Nations conferences

Category:Switzerland and the United Nations