{{Infobox person

name               = Lila Ibrahim

image              = LilaIbrahim.jpg

image_upright      = 1.15

caption            = Lila Ibrahim

birth_date         =

Ibrahim studied electrical and computer engineering at Purdue University. She earned her bachelor's degree in 1993. She was a member of the STEM sorority Phi Sigma Rho.

Career

Ibrahim started in 1993 at Intel as a design engineer on the Pentium processor. During 18 years at Intel she held various technical, marketing, and leadership positions, including serving as Chief of Staff for Craig Barrett. During this time she was appointed to the U.S. Secretary of Commerce's National Advisory Council on Innovation and Entrepreneurship.

In April 2018 Ibrahim was hired as the first Chief Operating Officer of DeepMind. According to Time, Ibrahim's duties at DeepMind include the management of that risk. In 2009, she was featured on the cover of ForbesWoman for her role promoting women in technology.

In 2019, Ibrahim was named to Business Insiders list of Most Influential Leaders Shaping Business Tech in the UK and Most Interesting & Impactful Women in Tech in the UK. In 2023, she was included on Times list of 100 Most Influential People in AI.

Personal life

Ibrahim is Lebanese-American. She has twin daughters.

References

Further reading

Category:American chief operating officers

Category:Purdue University College of Engineering alumni

Category:Silicon Valley people

Category:Living people

Category:Intel people

Category:American women computer scientists

Category:American computer scientists

Category:American people of Lebanese descent

Category:American women business executives

Category:20th-century American women scientists

Category:20th-century American businesswomen

Category:20th-century American businesspeople

Category:21st-century American women scientists

Category:21st-century American businesswomen

Category:21st-century American businesspeople

Category:Henry Crown Fellows

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:DeepMind people

Category:AI safety advocates