{{Infobox scientist

name              = Pushmeet Kohli

birth_date        =

birth_place       = Dehradun, Uttrakhand, India

nationality       = Indian-British

workplaces        = GoogleDeepMind

doctoral_advisor  = Philip Torr He went on to study at Oxford Brookes University, where he earned a PhD in computer vision under Philip Torr in 2007. Kohli was also a postdoctoral associate at the Psychometric Centre, University of Cambridge.

Career

Before joining Google DeepMind, Pushmeet Kohli was partner scientist and director of research at Microsoft Research. His research investigates applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence.

Pushmeet has made research contributions in the fields of computational biology,  program synthesis, superoptimization, discrete optimization, and psychometrics.

Notable Research Projects

AlphaFold - breakthrough AI system for protein structure prediction

AlphaEvolve - agent for code super optimization.

AlphaTensor - Reinforcement learning agent for discovering new algorithms for matrix multiplication

SynthID - system for watermarking AI generated images.

AlphaGenome and AlphaMissense - AI models for predicting the effect of mutations in the genome

AlphaCode - Competition-level code generation with AI

FunSearch - Discovering algorithms using LLMs to search over program space.

Neural Program Synthesis

Probabilistic Programming

Community based Crowdsourcing of Data for Training AI Models

Behavioral analysis and personality prediction using on online networks

Human Pose Estimation using the Kinect

Learnt Magnetic confinement control for Fusion

Learnt Density Functional for solving the fractional electron problem

Awards and honours

Pushmeet's research in computer vision and machine learning has been recognized by a number of scientific awards and prizes. Some notable ones include:

Koenderink Prize (Test of Time award) by the European Conference of Computer Vision

British Machine Vision Association and Society for Pattern Recognition (BMVA) Sullivan Prize for the best PhD thesis.

IEEE Mixed Augmented Reality (ISMAR) Impact Paper award

Lasting Impact Award by the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology

Best paper award at the International World Wide Web Conference 2014

Best paper award in the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 2010

Best paper award in the Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI)

References

Category:Indian computer scientists

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Living people

Category:Microsoft employees

Category:Scientists from Cambridge

Category:Alumni of Oxford Brookes University

Category:National Institutes of Technology alumni

Category:Computer vision researchers

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:DeepMind people