Richard Stuart Sutton  (born 1957 or 1958) is a Canadian computer scientist. He is a professor of computing science at the University of Alberta, fellow & Chief Scientific Advisor at the Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, and a research scientist at Keen Technologies. Sutton is considered one of the founders of modern computational reinforcement learning. In particular, he contributed to temporal difference learning and policy gradient methods.

Education and early life

Richard Sutton was born in either 1957 or 1958 in Ohio, and grew up in Oak Brook, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago, United States.

Sutton received his Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in psychology from Stanford University in 1978 before taking an Master of Science (1980) and PhD His doctoral dissertation

on AlphaGo in 2017|thumb]]

Career and research

Sutton held a postdoctoral research position at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 1984. He joined AT&T Labs Shannon Laboratory in Florham Park, New Jersey as principal technical staff member from 1998 to 2002. In 2017 he became a distinguished research scientist with Google DeepMind and helped launch DeepMind Alberta in Edmonton, a research office operated in close collaboration with the University of Alberta.

1984: Postdoctoral researcher, University of Massachusetts Amherst (Amherst, Massachusetts)

1985–1994: Principal member of technical staff, Computer and Intelligent Systems Laboratory, GTE Laboratories (Waltham, Massachusetts)

1995–1998: Senior research scientist, University of Massachusetts Amherst (Amherst, Massachusetts)

1998–2002: Principal technical staff member, Artificial Intelligence Department, AT&T Labs Shannon Laboratory (Florham Park, New Jersey)

2003–present: Professor of computing science, University of Alberta (Edmonton, Alberta)

2017–2023: Distinguished research scientist, DeepMind Alberta, Google DeepMind (Edmonton, Alberta)

2024–Present: Research scientist, Keen Technologies

Reinforcement learning

Sutton joined Andrew Barto in the early 1980s at UMass, trying to explore the behavior of neurons in the human brain as the basis for human intelligence, a concept that had been advanced by computer scientist A. Harry Klopf. Sutton and Barto used mathematics toward furthering the concept and using it as the basis for artificial intelligence. This concept became known as reinforcement learning and went on to becoming a key part of artificial intelligence techniques.

Sutton returned to Canada in the 2000s and continued working on the topic which continued to develop in academic circles until one of its first major real world applications saw Google's AlphaGo program built on this concept defeating the then prevailing human champion. Barto and Sutton have widely been credited and accepted as pioneers of modern reinforcement learning, with the technique itself being foundational to the AI boom.

In a 2019 essay, Sutton proposed the "bitter lesson", which criticized the field of AI research for failing to learn that "building in how we think we think does not work in the long run", arguing that "70 years of AI research [had shown] that general methods that leverage computation are ultimately the most effective, and by a large margin", beating efforts building on human knowledge about specific fields like computer vision, speech recognition, chess or Go.

Sutton argues that large language models aren’t capable of learning on-the-job, and so new model architectures are required to enable continual learning. Sutton further argues that a special training phase will be unnecessary — the agent will learn on-the-fly, rendering large language models obsolete. his nomination read: "For significant contributions to many topics in machine learning, including reinforcement learning, temporal difference techniques, and neural networks." and in 2013, the Outstanding Achievement in Research award from the University of Massachusetts Amherst. He received the 2024 Turing Award from the Association for Computing Machinery together with Andrew Barto; the citation of the award read: "For developing the conceptual and algorithmic foundations of reinforcement learning."

In 2016, Sutton was elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. In 2021, he was elected Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) of London.

Research

Sutton introduced temporal-difference methods for prediction and control, establishing convergence properties and practical algorithms. He proposed integrated learning and planning through the Dyna architecture. He co-developed the options framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. He co-authored the first modern policy gradient formulation with function approximation.

Sutton's essay The Bitter Lesson argued that general methods that scale with computation dominate domain-specific approaches in the long run.

His former doctoral students include David Silver and Doina Precup. include:

Personal life

Sutton became a Canadian citizen in 2015,

References

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Living people

Category:Canadian computer scientists

Category:Academic staff of the University of Alberta

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:Stanford University alumni

Category:University of Massachusetts Amherst alumni

Category:Canadian artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Canadian fellows of the Royal Society

Category:DeepMind people

Category:1950s births

Category:Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada

Category:Turing Award laureates

Category:AT&T people

Category:Artificial intelligence people

Category:Machine learning researchers