{{Infobox scientist

name              = Alexander Gammerman

image             = Alexander-Gammerman-professor-at-RHUL.jpg

birth_date        =

birth_place       = Almaty, Soviet Union

nationality       = British

workplaces        = Royal Holloway, University of London

alma_mater        = Saint Petersburg State UniversityRussia

known_for         = Conformal prediction

field             = Machine learningStatistics

}}

Alexander Gammerman (born 2 November 1944) is a British computer scientist, and professor at Royal Holloway University of London. He is the co-inventor of conformal prediction. He is the founding director of the Centre for Machine Learning at Royal Holloway, University of London, and a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society.

Career

Gammerman's academic career has been pursued in the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. He started working as a Research Fellow in the Agrophysical Research Institute, St. Petersburg. In 1983, he emigrated to the United Kingdom and was appointed as a lecturer in the Computer Science Department at Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh. In 1993, he was appointed to the established chair in Computer Science at University of London tenable at Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, where he served as the Head of Computer Science department from 1995 to 2005. In 1998, the Centre for Reliable Machine Learning was established, and Gammerman became the first director of the centre.

Gammerman has written 7 books.

Honours and awards

In 1996, Gammerman received the P.W. Allen Award from the Forensic Science Society. In 2006, he became a Honorary Professor, at University College London. In 2009, he became a Distinguished Professor at Complutense University of Madrid, Spain. In 2019, he received a research grant funded by the energy company Centrica about predicting the time to the next failure of equipment. In 2020, he received the Amazon Research Award for the project titled Conformal Martingales for Change-Point Detection

Selected books

Measures of Complexity (2016), Springer, .

Algorithmic Learning in a Random World (2005), Springer, .

Causal Models and Intelligent Data Management (1999), Springer, .

Probabilistic Reasoning and Bayesian Belief Networks (1998), Nelson Thornes Ltd, .

Computational Learning and Probabilistic Reasoning (1996), Wiley, .

References

External links

Gammerman's University Website

Category:Living people

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Soviet computer scientists

Category:Soviet mathematicians

Category:British mathematicians

Category:British computer scientists

Category:Academics of Royal Holloway, University of London

Category:Soviet emigrants to the United Kingdom

Category:Fellows of the Royal Statistical Society

Category:British artificial intelligence researchers

Category:1949 births

Category:Academics of Heriot-Watt University

Category:Academic staff of the Complutense University of Madrid