Andrew Yan-Tak Ng (; born April 18, 1976) is a British-American computer scientist and technology entrepreneur focusing on machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI).

Ng is an adjunct professor at Stanford University (formerly associate professor and Director of its Stanford AI Lab or SAIL). Ng has also worked in the field of online education, cofounding Coursera and DeepLearning.AI. He has spearheaded many efforts to "democratize deep learning" teaching over 8 million students through his online courses.

On April 11, 2024, Amazon announced the appointment of Ng to its board of directors.

Biography

Ng was born in London, in 1976 to Ronald Paul Ng, a hematologist and lecturer at UCL Medical School, and Tisa Ho, an arts administrator working at the London Film Festival. His parents were both immigrants from Hong Kong. He has at least one brother. During his high school years, he demonstrated exceptional mathematical ability, winning a Silver Medal at the International Mathematical Olympiad.

In 1997, he earned his undergraduate degree with a triple major in computer science, statistics, and economics from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Between 1996 and 1998 he also conducted research on reinforcement learning, model selection, and feature selection at the AT&T Bell Labs.

He started working as an assistant professor at Stanford University in 2002 and as an associate professor in 2009.

He currently lives in Los Altos Hills, California. In 2014, he married Carol E. Reiley. They have two children: a daughter born in 2019 and a son born in 2021. The MIT Technology Review named Ng and Reiley an "AI power couple". , his wife filed for a divorce.

Career

Academia and teaching

Ng is a professor at Stanford University departments of Computer Science and electrical engineering. He served as the director of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL), where he taught students and undertook research related to data mining, big data, and machine learning. His machine learning course CS229 at Stanford is the most popular course offered on campus with over 1,000 students enrolling some years. As of 2020, three of the most popular courses on Coursera are Ng's: Machine Learning (#1), AI for Everyone (#5), Neural Networks and Deep Learning (#6).

In 2008, his group at Stanford was one of the first in the US to start advocating the use of GPUs in deep learning. The rationale was that an efficient computation infrastructure could speed up statistical model training by orders of magnitude, ameliorating some of the scaling issues associated with big data. At the time it was a controversial and risky decision, but since then and following Ng's lead, GPUs have become a cornerstone in the field. Since 2017, Ng has been advocating the shift to high-performance computing (HPC) for scaling up deep learning and accelerating progress in the field.

In 2012, along with Stanford computer scientist Daphne Koller he cofounded and was CEO of Coursera, a website that offers free online courses to everyone. Today, several million people have enrolled in Coursera courses, making the site one of the leading massive open online courses (MOOCs) in the world.

Industry

From 2011 to 2012, he worked at Google, where he founded and directed the Google Brain Deep Learning Project with Jeff Dean, Greg Corrado, and Rajat Monga.

In 2014, he joined Baidu as chief scientist, and carried out research related to big data and AI. There he set up several research teams for things like facial recognition and Melody, an AI chatbot for healthcare. In March 2017, he announced his resignation from Baidu.

He soon afterward launched DeepLearning.AI, an online series of deep learning courses (including the AI for Good Specialization). Then Ng launched Landing AI, which provides AI-powered SaaS products.

In January 2018, Ng unveiled the AI Fund, raising $175 million to invest in new startups. In November 2021, Landing AI secured a $57 million round of series A funding led by McRock Capital, to help manufacturers adopt computer vision.

In October 2024, Ng's AI Fund made its first investment in India, backing AI healthcare startup Jivi, which uses AI for diagnoses, treatment recommendations, and administrative tasks. The investment highlights the growth of India's AI sector, expected to reach $22 billion by 2027.

Research

Ng researches primarily in machine learning, deep learning, machine perception, computer vision, and natural language processing; and is one of the world's most famous and influential computer scientists. He's frequently won best paper awards at academic conferences and has had a huge impact on the field of AI, computer vision, and robotics.

During graduate school, together with David M. Blei and Michael I. Jordan, Ng co-authored the influential paper that introduced latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) for his thesis on reinforcement learning for drones.

His early work includes the Stanford Autonomous Helicopter project, which developed one of the most capable autonomous helicopters in the world. He was the leading scientist and principal investigator on the STAIR (Stanford Artificial Intelligence Robot) project, which resulted in Robot Operating System (ROS), a widely used open source software robotics platform. His vision to build an AI robot and put a robot in every home inspired Scott Hassan to back him and create Willow Garage. He is also one of the founding team members for the Stanford WordNet project, which uses machine learning to expand the Princeton WordNet database created by Christiane Fellbaum.

In 2011, Ng founded the Google Brain project at Google, which developed large-scale artificial neural networks using Google's distributed computing infrastructure. Among its notable results was a neural network trained using deep learning algorithms on 16,000 CPU cores, which learned to recognize cats after watching only YouTube videos, and without ever having been told what a "cat" is. The project's technology is also currently used in the Android operating system's speech recognition system.

Online education: massive open online course

{{external media |width=210px |float=right |audio1=Interview with Coursera Co-Founder Andrew Ng, Degree of Freedom}}In 2011, Stanford launched a total of three massive open online course (MOOCs) on machine learning (CS229a), databases, and AI, taught by Ng, Peter Norvig, Sebastian Thrun, and Jennifer Widom. This has led to the modern MOOC movement. Ng taught machine learning and Widom taught databases. The course on AI taught by Thrun led to the genesis of Udacity.

Two other courses on databases (db-class.org) and AI (ai-class.org) were launched. The ml-class and db-class ran on a platform developed by students, including Frank Chen, Jiquan Ngiam, Chuan-Yu Foo, and Yifan Mai. Word spread through social media and popular press. The three courses were 10 weeks long, and over 40,000 "Statements of Accomplishment" were awarded.

Venture capital

Ng is the chair of the board for Woebot Labs, a psychological clinic that uses data science to provide cognitive behavioral therapy. It provides a therapy chatbot to help treat depression, among other things.

He is also a member of the board of directors for drive.ai, which uses AI for self-driving cars and was acquired by Apple in 2019.

Through Landing AI, he also focuses on democratizing AI technology and lowering the barrier for entrance to businesses and developers. His work in computer vision and deep learning has been featured often in press releases and reviews.

1995. Bell Atlantic Network Services Scholarship

1995, 1996. Microsoft Technical Scholarship Award

2008. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Technology Review, 35 Innovators Under 35 (TR35)

2009. IJCAI Computers and Thought Award (the highest award in AI given to a researcher under 35)

2009. Vance D. & Arlene C. Coffman Faculty Scholar Award

2013. Time 100 Most Influential People

2013. Fortune 40 under 40

2013. CNN 10: Thinkers

2014. Fast Company Most Creative People in Business

2015. World Economic Forum Young Global Leaders

2023. Time AI 100 Most Influential People

2024 Honorary Fellowship of the Royal Statistical Society.

He has corefereed hundreds of AI publications in journals like NeurIPS. He has also been the editor of the Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), Associate Editor for the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society Conference Editorial Board (ICRA), and much more. In December 2018, he wrote a sequel called AI Transformation Playbook.

Ng contributed one chapter to Architects of Intelligence: The Truth About AI from the People Building it (2018) by the American futurist Martin Ford.

Views on AI

Ng thinks that the real threat is contemplating the future of work: "Rather than being distracted by evil killer robots, the challenge to labor caused by these machines is a conversation that academia and industry and government should have." He has emphasized the importance of expanding access to AI education, stating that empowering people around the world to use AI tools is essential to building AI applications.

In a June 2024 interview with the Financial Times, Ng expressed concerns about proposed AI legislation in California that would have required developers to implement safety mechanisms such as a "kill switch" for advanced models. He described the bill as creating "massive liabilities for science-fiction risks" and said it "stokes fear in anyone daring to innovate." Other critics argued the bill would impose burdens on open-source developers and smaller AI companies. The bill was ultimately vetoed by Governor Gavin Newsom in September 2024.

See also

Coursera

Google Brain

Latent Dirichlet allocation

Robot Operating System

References

External links

Ng's Quora profile

Ng's Medium blog

Academic Genealogy

Andrew Ng's Publication List

Category:1976 births

Category:Living people

Category:American businesspeople in the computer industry

Category:American businesspeople in education

Category:American people of Hong Kong descent

Category:American roboticists

Category:American people of Chinese descent

Category:American chief executives in technology

Category:American technology company founders

Category:American technology writers

Category:American venture capitalists

Category:American artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Baidu people

Category:British artificial intelligence researchers

Category:British computer scientists

Category:British roboticists

Category:British chief executives in technology

Category:British technology company founders

Category:British technology writers

Category:British venture capitalists

Category:British emigrants to the United States

Category:Businesspeople from California

Category:Businesspeople from London

Category:Carnegie Mellon University alumni

Category:Computer vision researchers

Category:English businesspeople

Category:English male writers

Category:English people of Chinese descent

Category:English people of Hong Kong descent

Category:Google employees

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:People from Los Altos, California

Category:Raffles Junior College alumni

Category:Scientists from California

Category:Scientists from London

Category:Stanford University Department of Computer Science faculty

Category:Stanford University School of Engineering faculty

Category:UC Berkeley College of Engineering alumni

Category:Writers from California

Category:Writers from London