{{Infobox scientist

name              = Andrej Karpathy

image             = Andrej Karpathy, OpenAI.png

image_size        =

caption           = Karpathy at Stanford in 2016

birth_name        = Andrej Karpathy

birth_date        =

birth_place       = Bratislava, Czechoslovakia (now Slovakia)

fields            = Machine learningComputer visionArtificial intelligence

thesis_title      = Connecting Images and Natural Language

thesis_url        = https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/11849345

thesis_year       = 2016

doctoral_advisor  = Fei-Fei Li

website           =

}}

Andrej Karpathy (born 23 October 1986) is a Slovak-Canadian AI researcher who served as the director of artificial intelligence and Autopilot Vision at Tesla. He co-founded and formerly worked at OpenAI, where he specialized in deep learning and computer vision.

Education and early life

Karpathy was born in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia (now Slovakia), and moved with his family to Toronto when he was 15. He completed his Computer Science and Physics bachelor's degrees at University of Toronto in 2009 and his master's degree at University of British Columbia in 2011, The channel has over 9 million views as of June 2025.

Karpathy received a PhD from Stanford University in 2015 under the supervision of Fei-Fei Li, focusing on the intersection of natural language processing and computer vision, and deep learning models suited for this task.

Career and research

He authored and was the primary instructor of the first deep learning course at Stanford, CS 231n: Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recognition. It became one of the largest classes at Stanford, growing from 150 students in 2015 to 750 in 2017.

Karpathy is a founding member of the artificial intelligence research group OpenAI, where he was a research scientist from 2015 to 2017. He was named one of MIT Technology Review's Innovators Under 35 for 2020. After taking a several-months-long sabbatical from Tesla, he announced he was leaving the company in July 2022. As of February 2023, he makes YouTube videos on how to create artificial neural networks.

It was reported on February 9, 2023, that Karpathy had announced he was returning to OpenAI.

A year later on February 13, 2024, an OpenAI spokesperson confirmed that Karpathy had left OpenAI. In the same year, he was named one of Time Magazine's 100 Most Influential People in AI.

On July 16, 2024, Karpathy announced on his X account that he started a new AI education company called Eureka Labs. Their first product was the AI course, LLM101n. He also has a broader educational effort, the "Zero to Hero" series on LLM fundamentals. The company also advocates for AI teaching assistants, a concept which has been criticized due to data privacy concerns and the removal of personal connection between teacher and student.

In February 2025, Karpathy coined the term vibe coding to describe how AI tools allow hobbyists to construct apps and websites, just by typing prompts.

References

External links

Official website of Eureka Labs

Official GitHub account of Eureka Labs

Andrej Karpathy at GitHub

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Tesla, Inc. people

Category:Stanford University alumni

Category:Living people

Category:1986 births

Category:Slovak computer scientists

Category:Slovak emigrants to Canada

Category:Canadian computer scientists

Category:Canadian people of Slovak descent

Category:University of Toronto alumni

Category:Scientists from Toronto

Category:University of British Columbia alumni

Category:People from Bratislava

Category:OpenAI people

Category:Artificial intelligence people