{{Infobox scientist

name              = Clément Farabet

nationality       = French-American

fields            = Artificial IntelligenceNatural Language Processing & UnderstandingDeep Learning

workplaces        = New York UniversityGoogle DeepMind

alma_mater        = Université Paris-Est (Ph.D., 2010)

doctoral_advisor  = Laurent Najman, Yann LeCun

academic_advisors = Yann LeCun

website           =

}}

Clément Farabet is a computer scientist and AI expert known for his contributions to the field of deep learning. He served as a research scientist at the New York University.

He serves as the Vice President of Research at Google DeepMind and previously served as the VP of AI Infrastructure at NVIDIA.

His scholarly work received over 11,000 citations with an h-index of 21.

Education

In 2008, Farabet earned a master's degree in electrical engineering with honors from Institut national des sciences appliquées (INSA) de Lyon, France.

In 2010, Farabet received his PhD at Université Paris-Est, co-advised by Professors Laurent Najman and Yann LeCun. His thesis focused on real-time image understanding and introduced multi-scale convolutional networks and graph-based techniques for efficient segmentations of class prediction maps. He successfully defended his thesis in 2013.

Career

In 2008, after completing his Master's degree, Farabet joined Professor Yann LeCun's laboratory at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York University. His Master's thesis work on reconfigurable hardware for deep neural networks resulted in a patent. He continued his collaboration with Yann LeCun, and in 2009, he began working with Yale University's e-Lab, led by Eugenio Culurciello. This collaboration eventually led to the creation of TeraDeep.

He began his career as a researcher, contributing to the development of LuaTorch, one of the first AI frameworks, which later evolved into PyTorch, widely recognized and adopted globally.

Startups

Farabet co-founded MadBits, a startup with a focus on web-scale image understanding. The company was acquired by Twitter in 2014.

Following this acquisition, Farabet co-founded Twitter Cortex, a team dedicated to building Twitter's deep learning platform for various applications, including recommendations, search, spam detection, and NSFW content and ads.

Publications

References

Category:American computer scientists

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:New York University faculty

Category:Google employees

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Natural language processing researchers

Category:Living people

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)