{{Infobox scientist

name              = Geoffrey Hinton

honorific_suffix  =

image             = Geoffrey E. Hinton, 2024 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics (cropped1).jpg

caption           = Hinton giving Nobel lecture in 2024

birth_name        = Geoffrey Everest Hinton

birth_date        =

birth_place       = London, England, UK

death_date        =

death_place       =

education         =

known_for         =

spouse            = {{ubl |Joanne | |}}

father            = H. E. Hinton

relatives         =

awards            =

fields            =

workplaces        =

doctoral_advisor  = Christopher Longuet-Higgins

academic_advisors =

doctoral_students = {{Flatlist|

Richard Zemel

Brendan Frey

Radford M. Neal

Yee Whye Teh

Ruslan Salakhutdinov

Ilya Sutskever

Alex Krizhevsky In 2017, he co-founded and became the chief scientific advisor of the Vector Institute in Toronto.

With David Rumelhart and Ronald J. Williams, Hinton was co-author of a highly cited paper published in 1986 that popularised the backpropagation algorithm for training multi-layer neural networks,}} The image-recognition milestone of the AlexNet designed in collaboration with his students Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever for the ImageNet challenge 2012 was a breakthrough in the field of computer vision.

Hinton received the 2018 Turing Award, together with Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun for their work on deep learning. They are sometimes referred to as the "Godfathers of Deep Learning" and have continued to give public talks together. He was also awarded, along with John Hopfield, the 2024 Nobel Prize in Physics for "foundational discoveries and inventions that enable machine learning with artificial neural networks".

In May 2023, Hinton announced his resignation from Google to be able to "freely speak out about the risks of A.I." He noted that establishing safety guidelines will require cooperation among those competing in use of AI in order to avoid the worst outcomes. After receiving the Nobel Prize, he called for urgent research into AI safety to figure out how to control AI systems smarter than humans.

Education

Hinton was born on 6 December 1947 in Wimbledon, England, and was educated at Clifton College in Bristol. In 1967, he matriculated as an undergraduate student at King's College, Cambridge, and after repeatedly switching between different fields, like natural sciences, history of art, and philosophy, eventually graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in experimental psychology at the University of Cambridge in 1970. He spent a year apprenticing carpentry before returning to academic studies. University Professor Emeritus in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Toronto, where he has been affiliated since 1987.

Upon arrival in Canada, Geoffrey Hinton was appointed at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) in 1987 as a Fellow in CIFAR's first research program, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics & Society. In 2004, Hinton and collaborators successfully proposed the launch of a new program at CIFAR, "Neural Computation and Adaptive Perception" (NCAP), which today is named "Learning in Machines & Brains". Hinton would go on to lead NCAP for ten years. Among the members of the program are Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, with whom Hinton would go on to win the ACM A.M. Turing Award in 2018. All three Turing winners continue to be members of the CIFAR Learning in Machines & Brains program.

Hinton taught a free online course on Neural Networks on the education platform Coursera in 2012. He co-founded DNNresearch Inc. in 2012 with his two graduate students Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever at the University of Toronto’s department of computer science. In March 2013, Google acquired DNNresearch Inc. for $44 million, and Hinton planned to "divide his time between his university research and his work at Google".

Hinton's research concerns ways of using neural networks for machine learning, memory, perception, and symbol processing. He has written or co-written more than 200 peer-reviewed publications.

While Hinton was a postdoc at UC San Diego, David E. Rumelhart and Hinton and Ronald J. Williams applied the backpropagation algorithm to multi-layer neural networks. Their experiments showed that such networks can learn useful internal representations of data. In a 2018 interview, Hinton said that "David E. Rumelhart came up with the basic idea of backpropagation, so it's his invention". Although this work was important in popularising backpropagation, it was not the first to suggest the approach. Reverse-mode automatic differentiation, of which backpropagation is a special case, was proposed by Seppo Linnainmaa in 1970, and Paul Werbos proposed to use it to train neural networks in 1974. His other contributions to neural network research include distributed representations, time delay neural network, mixtures of experts, Helmholtz machines and product of experts. An accessible introduction to Geoffrey Hinton's research can be found in his articles in Scientific American in September 1992 and October 1993. In 2007, Hinton coauthored an unsupervised learning paper titled Unsupervised learning of image transformations. In 2008, he developed the visualization method t-SNE with Laurens van der Maaten.

In October and November 2017, Hinton published two open access research papers on the theme of capsule neural networks, which, according to Hinton, are "finally something that works well".

In May 2023, Hinton publicly announced his resignation from Google. He explained his decision by saying that he wanted to "freely speak out about the risks of A.I." and added that a part of him now regrets his life's work.

Notable former PhD students and postdoctoral researchers from his group include Peter Dayan, Sam Roweis, Alex Graves,

Recent scientific skepticism and philosophical stance

In 2021, Hinton solo-authored an additional paper called GLOM, which he quips matches the abbreviation "Geoff's Last Original Model". Since retirement from Google, he has expressed the desire to spend more time on more `philosophical-work'. In GLOM, he has expressed several fundamental limitations in existing neural networks. Hinton further argues that enabling vision-systems to dynamically encode such `part-whole parse-trees', is similar to how existing NLP systems systems construct lexical-parse trees. He has hypothesized that such systems like GLOM-Bert, could help encode such hierarchal understanding of the world.

In 1980's, Hinton was a part of the "Parallel Distributed Processing" group at CMU, consisting of notable scientists like Terrance Sejnowski, Francis Crick, David Rumenhart, and James L McClelland. This group was in  favour of `connectionism' debate during the AI winter. The key issue was that how a neural network could encode rules of logic, and `learn' rules of grammar by merely looking at data. Connectionism assumed that neural nets could learn these representations as a function of "weight-strengths" in the synapses. However, symbolists like Noam Chomsky, advocated on the reliance on symbols. Hinton recently criticized the "Theory-of-Language" in his recent talk at MIT. The findings of the PDP group were published in a two-volume set. This was instrumental in settling the debate of whether neural networks with more than 1 layer could be trained at all, and perform non-trivial tasks. Invention of backpropagation algorithm was a key contribution of this moment.

During his Turing Award Talk in 2020, Hinton mentioned 'the future of neural nets' the ability in neural networks to operate on multiple time-scales, for eg, slow-fast pathways. He published an additional paper on slow-fast weights at NeurIPS2016. Notably, is the ability of true-recursion in neural nets, where a neural network is able to process a part of the input using the same hardware that it uses to process the whole.

In 2021, Hinton mentioned that capsules are "something that works well". However, Hinton recently suggested eliminating the routing procedure altogether, and advocated for self-organizing systems like his GLOM architecture. Such systems have also been explored by other notable researchers, namely Vonn Neumann (at the time of his (Neumann's) death) and John Conway.

In 2021, Hinton also co-authored the seminal-paper on contrastive learning. The idea had been to push together representations of augmented-version of the same image, and pull apart dis-similar representations. However, in 2022, Hinton delivered an additional talk at Stanford University  highlighting the limitations of contrastive learning. In GLOM, Hinton proposed an additional idea of `islands-of-agreement' where pixels belonging to same object can agree with each other. In 2021/2023, papers at NeurIPS discovered these islands in practice.

Hinton has called some of his recent ideas as "not describing a working system". However, notable experts like Yoshua Bengio have come out publically in favour of these ideas: “Geoff has produced amazingly powerful intuitions many times in his career, many of which have proven right, Hence, I pay attention to them, especially when he feels as strongly about them as he does about GLOM.”. Hinton recently co-authored a paper exploring how GLOM works on extreme viewpoint-changes.  Recently, ideas from GLOM have been showed to work in practice at NeurIPS 2024.

At the 2022 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Hinton introduced a new learning algorithm for neural networks that he calls the "Forward-Forward" algorithm. The idea of the new algorithm is to replace the traditional forward-backward passes of backpropagation with two forward passes, one with positive (i.e. real) data and the other with negative data that could be generated solely by the network. This has been inspired by a long-line of research, that brain does not do backpropogation, and does not rely on optimizing 'global-objectives'. Hinton co-authored a Nature paper  on this topic in more detail. This has led to recent interest in fine-tuning billion-parameter language-models with only forward passes, and without requiring storage of explicit gradients of all the layers in the memory. An official implementation of forward-forward by Sindy Lowe has been posted on Hinton's website.

Recently at Vector Institute, Hinton has argued for a new kind of analog-intelligence which he termed as "Mortal-Computation". The idea involves two kinds of networks, larger-nets which could be trained via backpropagation on large GPU-clusters. Similarly, smaller networks could be trained on "edge-devices" using forward-forward algorithm. Finally, Hinton has been vocal on the benefits analog computers, where instead of multiplying matrices, one could operate on voltages, conductances to result in similar kind of computations.

Recently, Hinton has advocated on the importance of exploring `sleep like-mechanisms' in brain. More formally, he has argued that existing neural networks typically same external input from the environment (say input image). However, one could instead sample "dream-like states" in the neural-net itself, which could yield generative models, and explain how humans/large-language-models have a sensation of subjective experience, even while sleeping or merely thinking.

Hinton's research continues to inspire millions of researchers around the world. A notable quote includes "The future depends on some graduate student who is deeply suspicious of everything I have said."

Honours and awards

, Richard S. Sutton, Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, and Steve Jurvetson]]

Hinton is a Fellow of the US Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (FAAAI) since 1990. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada (FRSC) in 1996, and then a Fellow of the Royal Society of London (FRS) in 1998. He was the first winner of the Rumelhart Prize in 2001. His certificate of election for the Royal Society of London reads: {{centered pull quote|Geoffrey E. Hinton is internationally known for his work on artificial neural nets, especially how they can be designed to learn without the aid of a human teacher. He has compared effects of brain damage with effects of losses in such a net, and found striking similarities with human impairment, such as for recognition of names and losses of categorisation. His work includes studies of mental imagery, and inventing puzzles for testing originality and creative intelligence. It is conceptual, mathematically sophisticated, and experimental. He brings these skills together with striking effect to produce important work of great interest.}}

In 2001, Hinton was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science (DSc) degree from the University of Edinburgh. He was awarded as International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2003. Also, in this year he was elected a Fellow of the US Cognitive Science Society. He was the 2005 recipient of the IJCAI Award for Research Excellence lifetime-achievement award. He was awarded the 2011 Herzberg Canada Gold Medal for Science and Engineering. In that same year, he also was awarded an honorary DSc degree from the University of Sussex Hinton was elected an Honorary Foreign Member of the Spanish Royal Academy of Engineering in 2015. He received the 2016 IEEE/RSE Wolfson James Clerk Maxwell Award. In 2016, he furthermore won the BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the Information and Communication Technologies category, "for his pioneering and highly influential work" to endow machines with the ability to learn.

Together with Yann LeCun, and Yoshua Bengio, Hinton won the 2018 Turing Award for conceptual and engineering breakthroughs that have made deep neural networks a critical component of computing. Also in 2018, he became a Companion of the Order of Canada (CC).

In 2021, he received the Dickson Prize in Science from the Carnegie Mellon University and in 2022 the Princess of Asturias Award in the Scientific Research category, along with Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Demis Hassabis. In the same year, Hinton received an Honorary DSc degree from the University of Toronto. elected an International Member of the US National Academy of Sciences, and received Lifeboat Foundation's 2023 Guardian Award along with Ilya Sutskever.

In 2024, he was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics with John Hopfield "for foundational discoveries and inventions that enable machine learning with artificial neural networks." His development of the Boltzmann machine was explicitly mentioned in the citation. When the New York Times reporter Cade Metz asked Hinton to explain in simpler terms how the Boltzmann machine could "pretrain" backpropagation networks, Hinton quipped that Richard Feynman reportedly said: "Listen, buddy, if I could explain it in a couple of minutes, it wouldn't be worth the Nobel Prize." That same year, he received the VinFuture Prize grand award alongside Yoshua Bengio, Yann LeCun, Jen-Hsun Huang, and Fei-Fei Li for groundbreaking contributions to neural networks and deep learning algorithms.

In 2025 he was awarded the Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering jointly with Yoshua Bengio, Bill Dally, John Hopfield, Yann LeCun, Jen-Hsun Huang and Fei-Fei Li. He was also awarded the King Charles III Coronation Medal.

Views

Risks of artificial intelligence

In 2023, Hinton expressed concerns about the rapid progress of AI. He noted that "a part of him now regrets his life's work". In 2025, he said "My greatest fear is that, in the long run, it'll turn out that these kind of digital beings we're creating are just a better form of intelligence than people. […] We'd no longer be needed. […] If you want to know how it's like not to be the apex intelligence, ask a chicken.

Existential risk from AGI

Hinton has expressed concerns about the possibility of an AI takeover, stating that "it's not inconceivable" that AI could "wipe out humanity". He worries that generally intelligent AI systems could "create sub-goals" that are unaligned with their programmers' interests. He says that AI systems may become power-seeking or prevent themselves from being shut off, not because programmers intended them to, but because those sub-goals are useful for achieving later goals. In 2025, in an interview, Hinton cited the use of AI by bad actors to create lethal viruses one of the greatest existential threats posed in the short term. "It just requires one crazy guy with a grudge...you can now create new viruses relatively cheaply using AI. And you don't need to be a very skilled molecular biologist to do it."

Economic impacts

Hinton was previously optimistic about the economic effects of AI, noting in 2018 that: "The phrase 'artificial general intelligence' carries with it the implication that this sort of single robot is suddenly going to be smarter than you. I don't think it's going to be that. I think more and more of the routine things we do are going to be replaced by AI systems." Hinton had also argued that AGI would not make humans redundant: "[AI in the future is] going to know a lot about what you're probably going to want to do... But it's not going to replace you." In Hinton's view, AI will boost productivity and generate more wealth. But unless the government intervenes, it will only make the rich richer and hurt the people who might lose their jobs. "That's going to be very bad for society," he said.

At Christmas 2024 he had become somewhat more pessimistic, saying that there was a "10 to 20 percent chance" that AI would be the cause of human extinction within the following three decades (he had previously suggested a 10% chance, without a timescale). He expressed surprise at the speed with which AI was advancing, and said that most experts expected AI to advance, probably in the next 20 years, to be "smarter than people&nbsp;... a scary thought.&nbsp;... So just leaving it to the profit motive of large companies is not going to be sufficient to make sure they develop it safely. The only thing that can force those big companies to do more research on safety is government regulation." He moved from the US to Canada in part due to disillusionment with Ronald Reagan–era politics and disapproval of military funding of artificial intelligence.

Personal life

Hinton's first wife, Rosalind Zalin, died of ovarian cancer in 1994; his second wife, Jacqueline "Jackie" Ford, died of pancreatic cancer in 2018.

Hinton is the great-great-grandson of the mathematician and educator Mary Everest Boole and her husband, the logician George Boole. George Boole's work eventually became one of the foundations of modern computer science. Another great-great-grandfather of his was the surgeon and author James Hinton, who was the father of the mathematician Charles Howard Hinton.

Hinton's father was the entomologist Howard Hinton. His middle name comes from another relative, George Everest, the Surveyor General of India after whom the mountain is named. He is the nephew of the economist Colin Clark, and nuclear physicist Joan Hinton, one of the two female physicists at the Manhattan Project, was his first cousin once removed.

Hinton injured his back at age 19, which makes sitting painful for him. He has dealt with depression throughout his life.

References

Further reading

External links

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:British computer scientists

Category:British socialists

Category:Canadian computer scientists

Category:Canadian Nobel laureates

Category:Canadian socialists

Category:Nobel laureates in Physics

Category:Companions of the Order of Canada

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:2023 fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery

Category:Fellows of the Royal Society

Category:Google employees

Category:Living people

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Academic staff of the University of Toronto

Category:Canada Research Chairs

Category:1947 births

Category:Carnegie Mellon University faculty

Category:Rumelhart Prize laureates

Category:Alumni of King's College, Cambridge

Category:Alumni of the University of Edinburgh

Category:Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society

Category:Turing Award laureates

Category:People from Wimbledon, London

Category:Foreign associates of the National Academy of Engineering

Category:Hinton family

Category:Canadian fellows of the Royal Society

Category:People educated at Clifton College

Category:Artificial intelligence industry in Canada