{{Infobox scientist

name = Kunihiko Fukushima

birth_date          =

birth_place = Japanese Taiwan

image =

death_date =

death_place =

citizenship = Japan

fields = Computer science

workplaces = Fuzzy Logic Systems Institute

alma_mater = Kyoto University

known_for = Artificial neural networks, Neocognitron, Convolutional neural network architecture, Unsupervised learning, Deep learning, ReLU activation function

awards = IEICE Achievement Award and Excellent Paper AwardsIEEE Neural Networks Pioneer AwardAPNNA Outstanding Achievement AwardJNNS Excellent Paper AwardINNS Helmholtz AwardBower Award and Prize for Achievement in Science

}}

Kunihiko Fukushima (Japanese: 福島 邦彦, born 16 March 1936) is a Japanese computer scientist, most noted for his work on artificial neural networks and deep learning. He is currently working part-time as a senior research scientist at the Fuzzy Logic Systems Institute in Fukuoka, Japan.

the original deep convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture. Fukushima proposed several supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms to train the parameters of a deep neocognitron such that it could learn internal representations of incoming data. Today, however, the CNN architecture is usually trained through backpropagation. This approach is now heavily used in computer vision.

In 1969 Fukushima introduced the ReLU (Rectifier Linear Unit) activation function in the context of visual feature extraction in hierarchical neural networks, which he called "analog threshold element". (Though the ReLU was first used by Alston Householder in 1941 as a mathematical abstraction of biological neural networks.)  it is the most popular activation function for deep neural networks.

Education and career

In 1958, Fukushima received his Bachelor of Engineering in electronics from Kyoto University.

Fukushima acted as founding president of the Japanese Neural Network Society (JNNS). He also was a founding member on the board of governors of the International Neural Network Society (INNS), and president of the Asia-Pacific Neural Network Assembly (APNNA).

Awards

In 2020, Fukushima received the Bower Award and Prize for Achievement in Science. In 2022, Fukushima became a laureate of the Asian Scientist 100 by the Asian Scientist. He also received the IEICE Achievement Award and Excellent Paper Awards, the IEEE Neural Networks Pioneer Award, the APNNA Outstanding Achievement Award, the JNNS Excellent Paper Award and the INNS Helmholtz Award.

External links

ResearchMap profile

References

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Japanese computer scientists

Category:Academic staff of the University of Electro-Communications

Category:Living people

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Benjamin Franklin Medal (Franklin Institute) laureates