{{Infobox scientist

name = Leslie P. Kaelbling

image =

image_size =

alt =

caption =

birth_date =

birth_place =

death_date =

death_place =

nationality = American

fields = RoboticsComputer Science

work_institutions = SRI InternationalBrown UniversityMassachusetts Institute of Technology

alma_mater = Stanford University

doctoral_advisor = Nils J. Nilsson

doctoral_students = Michael L. LittmanLeonid PeshkinKristian Kersting

thesis_title = Learning in Embedded Systems

thesis_year = 1990

thesis_url = https://www.proquest.com/docview/303871770/

known_for = Partially observable Markov decision processFounder and first editor-in-chief of the Journal of Machine Learning Research

awards = IJCAI Computers and Thought Award (1997)AAAI Fellow (2000)

website =

}}

Leslie Pack Kaelbling is an American roboticist and the Panasonic Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She is widely recognized for adapting partially observable Markov decision processes from operations research for application in artificial intelligence and robotics. Kaelbling received the IJCAI Computers and Thought Award in 1997 for applying reinforcement learning to embedded control systems and developing programming tools for robot navigation. In 2000, she was elected as a Fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.

Career

Kaelbling received an A. B. in Philosophy in 1983 and a Ph.D. in Computer Science in 1990, both from Stanford University. During this time she was also affiliated with the Center for the Study of Language and Information. She then worked at SRI International and the affiliated robotics spin-off Teleos Research before joining the faculty at Brown University. She left Brown in 1999 to join the faculty at MIT. Her research focuses on decision-making under uncertainty, machine learning, and sensing with applications to robotics. Kaelbling co-founded and served as the first editor-in-chief of the Journal of Machine Learning Research, a peer-reviewed open access journal on the same topics which allows researchers to publish articles for free and retain copyright with its archives freely available online. In response to the mass resignation, Kluwer changed their publishing policy to allow authors to self-archive their papers online after peer-review. Kaelbling responded that this policy was reasonable and would have made the creation of an alternative journal unnecessary, but the editorial board members had made it clear they wanted such a policy and it was only after the threat of resignations and the actual founding of JMLR that the publishing policy finally changed.

Selected works

Reinforcement Learning: A Survey (LP Kaelbling, ML Littman, AW Moore). Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) 4 (1996) 237-285. A highly cited survey on the field of reinforcement learning.

Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains (LP Kaelbling, ML Littman, AR Cassandra). Artificial Intelligence 101 (1), 99-134.

Acting under uncertainty: Discrete Bayesian models for mobile-robot navigation (AR Cassandra, LP Kaelbling, JA Kurien). Intelligent Robots and Systems (2) 963-972.

The synthesis of digital machines with provable epistemic properties (SJ Rosenschein, LP Kaelbling). Proceedings of the 1986 Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowledge, 83-98.

Practical reinforcement learning in continuous spaces (WD Smart, LP Kaelbling). 2000 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 903-910.

Hierarchical task and motion planning in the now (LP Kaelbling, T Lozano-Pérez). 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 1470-1477.

References

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Living people

Category:American roboticists

Category:Women roboticists

Category:American women computer scientists

Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology faculty

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:American computer science educators

Category:Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences alumni

Category:SRI International people

Category:Brown University faculty

Category:American artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Stanford University School of Engineering alumni

Category:American women academics

Category:21st-century American women