{{Infobox person

name               = Lior Ron

image              = Lior Ron in January 2017.jpg

caption            = Ron speaks during a panel discussion of the DLD17 (Digital-Life-Design) Conference at the Alte Bayerische Staatsbank on 16 January, 2017, in Munich.

birth_date         =

alma_mater         = Technion – Israel Institute of Technology (BSc and MA)  Stanford Graduate School of Business (MBA)

occupation         = Businessman

known_for          = Co-founder, Otto  Founder & CEO, Uber Freight

}}

Lior Ron (born March 16, 1977) is an Israeli businessman. He is the founder and CEO of logistics technology company Uber Freight,  and the co-founder of self-driving truck company Otto.

Early life and education

Ron grew up in Israel near Haifa. He attended the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa, where he earned a bachelor's degree in computer science in 1997. He then joined Israeli Army Intelligence, where he served until 2004. His undergraduate work and master's thesis were centered around AI when it was still in its early stages.

Career

Google

In 2007, Ron joined Google as the Product Lead for Google Maps. He then worked at Motorola Mobility after it was acquired by Google, and in Google's robotics research effort.

Otto

In 2016, Ron left Google to found Otto, a company that makes self-driving kits to retrofit big rig trucks. Quoted in Wired, Ron said he left Google because he “felt an obligation to bring this technology to society sooner rather than later.” Otto launched in May 2016, and was acquired by Uber in late July of the same year. The Uber partnership allowed Ron and Otto the opportunity to develop a freight marketplace for truck drivers.

Uber Freight

On May 18, 2017, Ron and Uber launched Uber Freight, a unit of Uber initially designed as an app connecting long-haul truck drivers with companies in need of cargo shipping, with Ron as CEO. In August 2018, Uber Freight launched a new digital platform focused on shippers, to help them find the right driver for their needs. In 2021, Uber Freight acquired Transplace for $2.25 billion, expanding its services to include managed transportation, logistics software, and consulting.

With Ron as CEO, Uber Freight has evolved into a full-scale logistics technology company for shippers and drivers, as Ron introduced more advanced generative AI capabilities to Uber Freight's software and Insights AI logistics platform. In May 2025, the company launched the transportation industry's first large-scale AI-powered logistics network, with its large language model embedded directly into its transportation management system.

Controversy

Ron co-founded Otto with Anthony Levandowski, who faces a lawsuit brought in 2017 from Google's parent company Alphabet that alleges Levandowski stole trade secrets while working for Alphabet's self-driving car division before he and Ron co-founded Otto.

References

Category:1977 births

Category:Silicon Valley people

Category:Living people

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Businesspeople from the San Francisco Bay Area

Category:American technology company founders

Category:Google employees

Category:Stanford Graduate School of Business alumni

Category:Technion – Israel Institute of Technology alumni

Category:Uber people

Category:American chief executives in technology

Category:Technion – Israel Institute of Technology