{{Infobox academic

name = Mihaela van der Schaar

honorific suffix =

image = Mihaela van der Schaar Jan 2019.jpg

caption = Mihaela van der Schaar in January 2019

workplaces = University of Cambridge

University of California, Los Angeles

University of Oxford

University of California, Davis

Philips Research Laboratories

birth_date =

nationality = Dutch

alma_mater = Eindhoven University of Technology

thesis_title = System and network constrained scalable video compression

thesis_year = 2001

doctoral_advisor = Jan Biemond

discipline = Computer engineering

sub_discipline = Machine learning

Artificial intelligence

website = vanderschaar-lab.com

}}

Mihaela van der Schaar  is the John Humphrey Plummer Professor of Machine Learning, AI, and Medicine at the University of Cambridge, where she is director of the Cambridge Centre for AI in Medicine (CCAIM), and a Chancellor's Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Her research involves topics in signal and image processing, communication networks, network science, multimedia, game theory, distributed systems, machine learning, and AI. van der Schaar focuses on medical applications of computer engineering, including AI-enabled personalized medicine. She completed her PhD while simultaneously working as a researcher at Philips Research Laboratories.

At Philips, van der Schaar helped develop the first algorithm for video streaming and, as their representative to the International Organization for Standardization from 1999 to 2003, led working groups which determined early standards for streaming.

van der Schaar joined the faculty at the University of Cambridge in 2018. In November 2020, van der Schaar was named the director of the new Cambridge Centre for AI in Medicine, a research collaboration between the University of Cambridge, GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca to study applications of machine learning to the medical profession.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic in April 2020, van der Schaar's research group was part of a collaboration with the UK National Health Service, which used machine learning to predict shortages of ICU beds and ventilators in English hospitals.

As of 2020, van der Schaar has published over 250 academic journal articles and submitted over 275 conference papers, and her work has resulted in 35 US patents and contributed to over 45 international standards.

As of 2022, van der Schaar's work has been cited over 23,000 times.

Honours and awards

van der Schaar was elected as a Fellow of the IEEE in 2009, and she has held a fellowship with the Alan Turing Institute since 2016.

She has also received a National Science Foundation CAREER Award (2004),  the IEEE Darlington Award (2011), and the Oon Prize on Preventative Medicine from the University of Cambridge (2018).

In 2019, a Nesta report determined that van der Schaar was the most-cited female AI researcher in the UK.

References

Category:1971 births

Category:Living people

Category:Eindhoven University of Technology alumni

Category:Dutch expatriates in England

Category:John Humphrey Plummer Professors

Category:University of California, Los Angeles faculty

Category:Academics of the University of Oxford

Category:University of California, Davis faculty

Category:Philips employees

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Fellows of the IEEE

Category:Fellows of the Royal Society

Category:Dutch women computer scientists