{{Infobox scientist

name              = Pedro Domingos

native_name       =

native_name_lang  =

image             = Pedro_domingos_2023.png

image_size        =

alt               =

caption           = Domingos in 2023

birth_date        =

birth_place       = Lisbon, Portugal of computer science and engineering at the University of Washington. He is a researcher in machine learning known for Markov logic network enabling uncertain inference.

Education

Domingos received an undergraduate degree and Master of Science degree from Instituto Superior Técnico (IST). He moved to the University of California, Irvine, where he received a Master of Science degree followed by his PhD. He started a machine learning research group at the hedge fund D. E. Shaw & Co. in 2018, but left in 2019.

He co-founded the International Machine Learning Society. As of 2018, he was on the editorial board of Machine Learning journal.

Publications

Pedro Domingos, The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World, New York, Basic Books, 2015, .

Pedro Domingos, "Our Digital Doubles: AI will serve our species, not control it", Scientific American, vol. 319, no. 3 (September 2018), pp.&nbsp;88–93. "AIs are like autistic savants and will remain so for the foreseeable future.... AIs lack common sense and can easily make errors that a human never would... They are also liable to take our instructions too literally, giving us precisely what we asked for instead of what we actually wanted." (p.&nbsp;93.)

Pedro Domingos, 2040: A Silicon Valley Satire, BookBaby, 2024, .

Awards and honors

2014: ACM SIGKDD Innovation Award. for his foundational research in data stream analysis, cost-sensitive classification, adversarial learning, and Markov logic networks, as well as applications in viral marketing and information integration.

2010: Elected an Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Fellow. For significant contributions to the field of machine learning and to the unification of first-order logic and probability.

2003: Sloan Fellowship

1992–1997: Fulbright Scholarship

References

Category:University of Washington faculty

Category:University of California, Irvine alumni

Category:Instituto Superior Técnico alumni

Category:Technical University of Lisbon alumni

Category:Sloan Research Fellows

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Computer scientists

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:D. E. Shaw & Co. people

Category:Living people

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:1965 births