{{multiple issues|

}}

{{Infobox scientist

birth_name = Tamara Ann Broderick

workplaces = Massachusetts Institute of Technology

alma_mater =   Princeton University (BS)University of Cambridge (MAS) University of California, Berkeley (PhD)

thesis_title = Clusters and features from combinatorial stochastic processes

awards = National Science Foundation CAREER Award

thesis_url = https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9s76h6kh

thesis_year = 2014

fields = Machine LearningStatisticsBayesian Inference

website =

}}

Tamara Ann Broderick is an American computer scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She works on machine learning and Bayesian inference.

Education and early career

Broderick is from Parma Heights, Ohio. She attended Laurel School and graduated in 2003. Whilst at high school she took part in the inaugural Massachusetts Institute of Technology Women's Technology Program. She studied mathematics at Princeton University, earning a bachelor's degree in 2007. She was co-president of the Princeton Math Club and organised a competition for high school maths teams. During her undergraduate degree, Broderick worked on dark matter haloes with Rachel Mandelbaum. Broderick moved to the United Kingdom for her graduate studies, earning a Master of Advanced Studies for completing Part III of the Mathematical Tripos at the University of Cambridge in 2009. Her Master's thesis looked at the Nomon selection method, improving the efficiency of communications. She returned to America in 2009, joining University of California, Berkeley for her Master's and PhD.

Research and career

Broderick joined Massachusetts Institute of Technology as an assistant professor in 2015. She was the recipient of a Google Faculty Research Grant and International Society for Bayesian Analysis Lifetime Members Junior Researcher Award. She was awarded an Army Research Office young investigator program award to investigate machine-learning to quantify uncertainty in data analysis.  Broderick is also Alfred P. Sloan Foundation scholar.

Academic service

In 2018, Broderick spoke at the Harvard University Institute for Applied Computational Science Women in Data Science conference. She spoke about Bayesian inference at the 2018 International Conference on Machine Learning. She led a three-day Masterclass on machine learning at University College London in June 2018. Broderick is a scientific advisor for AI.Reverie and WiML (Women in Machine Learning). She has developed a high-school level introduction to machine learning with the Women's Technology Program (WTP).

Awards and honors

Broderick was awarded the Evelyn Fix Memorial Medal and Citation and the International Society for Bayesian Analysis Savage Award for her doctoral thesis. She was awarded a National Science Foundation CAREER Award to scale her machine learning techniques. She was a 2021 Leadership Academy winner of the Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies.

References

Category:Year of birth missing (living people)

Category:Living people

Category:American women computer scientists

Category:American computer scientists

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Alumni of the University of Cambridge

Category:University of California, Berkeley alumni

Category:Princeton University alumni

Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology faculty

Category:21st-century American women