{{Infobox scientist

name              = Trevor John Hastie

image             = TrevorHastiePic.jpg

image_size        = 180px

birth_date        =

birth_place       = Cape Town, South Africa

nationality       = American, South African

citizenship       = American, South African

field             = Statistical learning, Data science, Biostatistics, Statistical computing

work_institution  = Stanford University AT&T Bell LaboratoriesLondon School of Hygiene and Tropical MedicineSouth African Medical Research Council

alma_mater        = Stanford University University of Cape Town Rhodes University

doctoral_advisor  = Werner Stuetzle

doctoral_students = Ph.D. advisor to 28 students: among these, Gareth James, Mu Zhu, Ji Zhu, Saharon Rosset, Hui Zou, Rahul Mazumder, Will Fithian, Jason Lee, Qingyuan Zhao, Zijun Gao, Elizabeth Chin, and Elena Tuzhilina are now university professors.

spouse            = Lynda Hastie

}}

Trevor John Hastie (born 27 June 1953) is an American statistician and computer scientist. He is currently serving as the John A. Overdeck Professor of Mathematical Sciences and Professor of Statistics at Stanford University. Hastie is known for his contributions to applied statistics, especially in the field of machine learning, data mining, and bioinformatics. He has authored several popular books in statistical learning, including The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Hastie has been listed as an ISI Highly Cited Author in Mathematics by the ISI Web of Knowledge. He also contributed to the development of S.

Education and career

Hastie was born on 27 June 1953 in South Africa. He received his B.S. in statistics from the Rhodes University in 1976 and master's degree from University of Cape Town in 1979. Hastie joined the doctoral program at Stanford University in 1980 and received his Ph.D. in 1984 under the supervision of Werner Stuetzle. His dissertation was "Principal Curves and Surfaces". He joined Stanford University in 1994 as Associate Professor in Statistics and Biostatistics. He was promoted to full Professor in 1999. During the period 2006–2009, he was the chair of the Department of Statistics at Stanford University.  In 2013 he was named the John A. Overdeck Professor of Mathematical Sciences.

Awards and honors

Hastie is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society since 1979. He is also an elected Fellow of several professional and scholarly societies, including the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the American Statistical Association, and the South African Statistical Society. He is a recipient of 'Myrto Lefkopolou Distinguished Lectureship' award of Biostatistics Department at the Harvard School of Public Health. In 2018, he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. In 2019 Hastie became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Hastie was named for the C.R. and Bhargavi Rao Prize in 2025.

Hastie and Hui Zou received the 2025 Founders of Statistics prize for their elastic net paper.

Publications

Hastie is a prolific author of scientific works on numerous topics in applied statistics, including statistical learning, data mining, statistical computing, and bioinformatics. He along with his collaborators has authored about 125 scientific articles. Many of Hastie's scientific articles were coauthored by his longtime collaborator, Robert Tibshirani. Hastie has been listed as an ISI Highly Cited Author in Mathematics by the ISI Web of Knowledge. He has coauthored the following books:

T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, Generalized Additive Models, Chapman and Hall, 1990.

J. Chambers and T. Hastie, Statistical Models in S, Wadsworth/Brooks Cole, 1991.

T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning: Prediction, Inference and Data Mining, Second Edition, Springer Verlag, 2009  (available for free from the author's website).

G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to Statistical Learning with Applications in R, Springer Verlag, 2013  (available for free from the co-author's website).

T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, M. Wainwright, Statistical Learning with Sparsity: the Lasso and Generalizations, CRC Press, 2015  (available for free from the author's website).

References

External links

Category:Living people

Category:1953 births

Category:Rhodes University alumni

Category:University of Cape Town alumni

Category:Stanford University alumni

Category:Stanford University Department of Statistics faculty

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Fellows of the American Statistical Association

Category:Fellows of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics

Category:Fellows of the Royal Statistical Society

Category:Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences

Category:American mathematical statisticians