{{Infobox scientist

name              = Yann LeCun

image             = Laura Chaubard & Yann Le Cun - 2024 (53814052697) (cropped).jpg

caption           = LeCun in 2024

birth_place       = Soisy-sous-Montmorency, France

birth_date        =

fields            = Computer science

workplaces        =

citizenship       =

education         =

thesis_title      = Modeles connexionnistes de l'apprentissage (connectionist learning models)

thesis_year       = 1987

thesis_url        = http://www.sudoc.fr/043586643

doctoral_advisor  = Maurice Milgram

known_for         = Deep learning

awards            =

website           =

}}

Yann André Le Cun ( ; ; usually spelled LeCun;

He is well known for his work on optical character recognition and computer vision using convolutional neural networks (CNNs). He is also one of the main creators of the DjVu image compression technology, alongside Léon Bottou and Patrick Haffner. He co-developed the Lush programming language with Léon Bottou.

In 2018, LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton, received the Turing Award for their work on deep learning. The three are sometimes referred to as the "Godfathers of AI" and "Godfathers of Deep Learning".

Early life and education

, 2014]]

LeCun was born on 8 July 1960, at Soisy-sous-Montmorency in the suburbs of Paris. His name, Le Cun, originates from the old Breton form Le Cunff, and was from the region of Guingamp in northern Brittany. "Yann" is the Breton form for "John". Before joining AT&T, LeCun was a postdoc for a year, starting in 1987, under Geoffrey Hinton at the University of Toronto.

Career

Bell Labs

In 1988, LeCun joined the Adaptive Systems Research Department at AT&T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, New Jersey, United States, headed by Lawrence D. Jackel, where he developed a number of new machine learning methods, such as a biologically inspired model of image recognition called convolutional neural networks (LeNet), the"Optimal Brain Damage" regularization methods, and the Graph Transformer Networks method (similar to conditional random field), which he applied to handwriting recognition and Optical character recognition (OCR). The bank check recognition system that he helped develop was widely deployed by NCR and other companies, reading over 10% of all the checks in the US in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

In 1996, he joined AT&T Labs-Research as head of the Image Processing Research Department, which was part of Lawrence Rabiner's Speech and Image Processing Research Lab, and worked primarily on the DjVu image compression technology, used by many websites, notably the Internet Archive, to distribute scanned documents. His collaborators at AT&T include Léon Bottou and Vladimir Vapnik.

New York University

After a brief tenure as a Fellow of the NEC Research Institute (now NEC-Labs America) in Princeton, NJ, LeCun joined New York University (NYU) in 2003, where he is Jacob T. Schwartz Chaired Professor of Computer Science and Neural Science at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and the Center for Neural Science. He is also a professor at the Tandon School of Engineering. At NYU, he has worked primarily on Energy-Based Models for supervised and unsupervised learning, feature learning for object recognition in Computer Vision, and mobile robotics.

In 2012, he became the founding director of the NYU Center for Data Science. On 9 December 2013, LeCun became the first director of Meta AI Research in New York City and in early 2014 stepped down from the NYU-CDS directorship.  In 2025 it was reported that LeCun was leaving Meta to launch his own start-up.

In 2013, he and Yoshua Bengio co-founded the International Conference on Learning Representations, which adopted a post-publication open review process he previously advocated on his website. He was the chair and organiser of the "Learning Workshop" held every year between 1986 and 2012 in Snowbird, Utah. He is a member of the Science Advisory Board of the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics at UCLA. He is the Co-Director of the Learning in Machines and Brain research program (formerly Neural Computation & Adaptive Perception) of CIFAR.

In 2016, he was the visiting professor of computer science on the "Chaire Annuelle Informatique et Sciences Numériques" at Collège de France in Paris, where he presented the "leçon inaugurale" (inaugural lecture). In 2023, he was named as the inaugural Jacob T. Schwartz Chaired Professor in Computer Science at NYU's Courant Institute. LeCun is also a scientific advisor to French research group Kyutai which is being funded by Xavier Niel, Rodolphe Saadé, Eric Schmidt, and others.

Meta

LeCun joined Facebook (later Meta) in 2013 as Chief AI Scientist and led the company's AI research laboratory, FAIR. On 19 November 2025, he confirmed that he would be leaving Meta after ten years to found his own company focused on world-model architectures and human-like artificial intelligence.

Honours and awards

LeCun is a member of the US National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering and the French Académie des Sciences.

He has received honorary doctorates from IPN in Mexico City in 2016, from EPFL in 2018, from Université Côte d'Azur in 2021, from Università di Siena in 2023, and from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2023.

In 2014, he received the IEEE Neural Network Pioneer Award and in 2015, the PAMI Distinguished Researcher Award.

In 2018, LeCun was awarded the IRI Medal, established by the Industrial Research Institute (IRI), and the Harold Pender Award, given by the University of Pennsylvania.

In 2019, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.

In March 2019, LeCun won the 2018 Turing Award, sharing it with Yoshua Bengio and Geoffrey Hinton.

In 2022, he received the Princess of Asturias Award in the category "Scientific Research", along with Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton and Demis Hassabis.

In 2023, the President of France made him a Chevalier (Knight) of the French Legion of Honour.

During the World Economic Forum (WEF) 2024 in Davos, he received the Global Swiss AI Award 2023. The same year, he received the grand prize of the VinFuture Prize alongside Yoshua Bengio, Jensen Huang, Geoffrey Hinton, and Fei-Fei Li for their groundbreaking contributions to neural networks and deep learning algorithms.

In 2025 he was awarded the Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering jointly with Yoshua Bengio, Bill Dally, Geoffrey E. Hinton, John Hopfield, Jen-Hsun Huang and Fei-Fei Li.

References

External links

Category:1960 births

Category:Living people

Category:2023 fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery

Category:Academic staff of the Collège de France

Category:American atheists

Category:American people of Breton descent

Category:American roboticists

Category:Artificial intelligence researchers

Category:Computer vision researchers

Category:Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences faculty

Category:Facebook employees

Category:Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence

Category:French atheists

Category:French computer scientists

Category:French emigrants to the United States

Category:French people of Breton descent

Category:French roboticists

Category:Free software programmers

Category:Machine learning researchers

Category:Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences

Category:People from Soisy-sous-Montmorency

Category:Pierre and Marie Curie University alumni

Category:Polytechnic Institute of New York University faculty

Category:Scientists at Bell Labs

Category:Turing Award laureates

Category:Silver professors

Category:Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences alumni