Detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) is a multivariate statistical technique widely used by ecologists to find the main factors or gradients in large, species-rich but usually sparse data matrices that typify ecological community data. DCA is frequently used to suppress artifacts inherent in most other multivariate analyses when applied to gradient data.

History

DCA was created in 1979 by Mark Hill of the United Kingdom's Institute for Terrestrial Ecology (now

merged into Centre for Ecology and Hydrology) and implemented in FORTRAN code package called DECORANA (Detrended Correspondence Analysis), a correspondence analysis method.  DCA is sometimes erroneously referred to as DECORANA; however, DCA is the underlying algorithm, while DECORANA is a tool implementing it.

Issues addressed

According to Hill and Gauch, in the vegan R-package.

See also

Eigenanalysis

Ordination (statistics)

Seriation (archaeology) &ndash; including additional examples for the arch effect

Principal Component Analysis

References

Hill, M.O. (1979).  DECORANA &mdash; A FORTRAN program for Detrended Correspondence Analysis and Reciprocal Averaging.  Section of Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 52pp.

Hill, M.O. and Gauch, H.G. (1980). Detrended Correspondence Analysis: An Improved Ordination Technique. Vegetatio 42, 47&ndash;58.

Oksanen J and Minchin PR (1997).  Instability of ordination results under changes in input data order: explanation and remedies.  Journal of  vegetation science 8, 447&ndash;454

Shaw PJA (2003).  Multivariate Statistics for the Environmental Sciences.  London: Hodder Arnold

Ter Braak, C.J.F. and Prentice, I.C. (1988). A Theory of Gradient Analysis. Advances in Ecological Research 18, 271&ndash;371. . Reprinted in: Ter Braak, C.J.F. (1987). Unimodal models to relate species to environment. Wageningen: PhD thesis Agricultural Mathematics Group, 101&ndash;146.

External links

PAST (PAlaeontological STatistics) &mdash; free software including DCA  with modifications according to Oksanen and Minchin (1997)

WINBASP &mdash; free software including DCA with detrending-by-polynomials according to Ter Braak and Prentice (1988)

vegan: Community Ecology Package for R &mdash; free software including the function decorana: Detrended Correspondence Analysis and Basic Reciprocal Averaging from Hill and Gauch (1980)

Category:Dimension reduction