Multilinear subspace learning is an approach for disentangling the causal factor of data formation and performing  dimensionality reduction.

The Dimensionality reduction can be performed on a data tensor that contains a collection of observations that have been vectorized,  Here are some examples of data tensors whose observations are vectorized  or whose observations are matrices concatenated into data tensor images (2D/3D), video sequences (3D/4D), and hyperspectral cubes (3D/4D).

The mapping from a high-dimensional vector space to a set of lower dimensional vector spaces is a multilinear projection. When observations are retained in the same organizational structure as matrices or higher order tensors, their representations are computed by performing linear projections into the column space, row space and fiber space.

Algorithms

Multilinear principal component analysis

Historically, multilinear principal component analysis has been referred to as "M-mode PCA", a terminology which was coined by Peter Kroonenberg.

In 2005, Vasilescu and Terzopoulos introduced the Multilinear PCA terminology as a way to better differentiate between multilinear tensor decompositions that computed 2nd order statistics associated with each data tensor mode, and subsequent work on Multilinear Independent Component Analysis

TVP-based: Uncorrelated Multilinear Discriminant Analysis (UMLDA)

Multilinear canonical correlation analysis

Multilinear extension of CCA

TTP-based: Tensor Canonical Correlation Analysis (TCCA)

TVP-based: Multilinear Canonical Correlation Analysis (MCCA)

TVP-based: Bayesian Multilinear Canonical Correlation Analysis (BMTF)

A TTP is a direct projection of a high-dimensional tensor to a low-dimensional tensor of the same order, using N projection matrices for an Nth-order tensor. It can be performed in N steps with each step performing a tensor-matrix multiplication (product). The N steps are exchangeable. This projection is an extension of the higher-order singular value decomposition in 1960s.

A TVP is a direct projection of a high-dimensional tensor to a low-dimensional vector, which is also referred to as the rank-one projections. As TVP projects a tensor to a vector, it can be viewed as multiple projections from a tensor to a scalar. Thus, the TVP of a tensor to a P-dimensional vector consists of P projections from the tensor to a scalar. The projection from a tensor to a scalar is an elementary multilinear projection (EMP). In EMP, a tensor is projected to a point through N unit projection vectors. It is the projection of a tensor on a single line (resulting a scalar), with one projection vector in each mode. Thus, the TVP of a tensor object to a vector in a P-dimensional vector space consists of P EMPs. This projection is an extension of the canonical decomposition, also known as the parallel factors (PARAFAC) decomposition.

Typical approach in MSL

There are N sets of parameters to be solved, one in each mode. The solution to one set often depends on the other sets (except when N=1, the linear case). Therefore, the suboptimal iterative procedure in is followed.

Initialization of the projections in each mode

For each mode, fixing the projection in all the other mode, and solve for the projection in the current mode.

Do the mode-wise optimization for a few iterations or until convergence.

This is originated from the alternating least square method for multi-way data analysis.

Code

MATLAB Tensor Toolbox by Sandia National Laboratories.

The MPCA algorithm written in Matlab (MPCA+LDA included).

The UMPCA algorithm written in Matlab (data included).

The UMLDA algorithm written in Matlab (data included).

Tensor data sets

3D gait data (third-order tensors): 128x88x20(21.2M); 64x44x20(9.9M); 32x22x10(3.2M);

See also

CP decomposition

Dimension reduction

Multilinear algebra

Multilinear Principal Component Analysis

Tensor

Tensor decomposition

Tensor software

Tucker decomposition

References

Category:Dimension reduction

Category:Multilinear algebra

Category:Tensors