In statistics, a latent class model (LCM) is a model for clustering multivariate discrete data. It assumes that the data arise from a mixture of discrete distributions, within each of which the variables are independent. It is called a latent class model because the class to which each data point belongs is unobserved (or latent).

Latent class analysis (LCA) is a subset of structural equation modeling used to find groups or subtypes of cases in multivariate categorical data. These groups or subtypes of cases are called "latent classes".

When faced with the following situation, a researcher might opt to use LCA to better understand the data: Symptoms a, b, c, and d have been recorded in a variety of patients diagnosed with diseases X, Y, and Z. Disease X is associated with symptoms a, b, and c; disease Y is linked to symptoms b, c, and d; and disease Z is connected to symptoms a, c, and d.

In this context, the LCA would attempt to detect the presence of latent classes (i.e., the disease entities), thus creating patterns of association in the symptoms. As in factor analysis, LCA can also be used to classify cases according to their maximum likelihood class membership probability.

The key criterion for resolving the LCA is identifying latent classes in which the observed symptom associations are effectively rendered null. This is because within each class, the diseases responsible for the symptoms create a structure of dependencies. As a result, the symptoms become conditionally independent, meaning that, given the class a case belongs to, the symptoms are no longer related to one another. Behavior Genetics and Evaluation of diagnostic tests.

References

External links

Statistical Innovations, Home Page, 2016. Website with latent class software (Latent GOLD 5.1), free demonstrations, tutorials, user guides, and publications for download. Also included: online courses, FAQs, and other related software.

The Methodology Center, Latent Class Analysis, a research center at Penn State, free software, FAQ

John Uebersax, Latent Class Analysis, 2006. A web-site with bibliography, software, links and FAQ for latent class analysis

Category:Classification algorithms

Category:Latent variable models

Category:Market research

Category:Market segmentation