{{Infobox software

name = DALL-E

logo = DALL-E 2 Signature.svg

logo caption = Watermark present on DALL-E images

screenshot = DALL-E 2 artificial intelligence digital image generated photo.jpg

caption = An image generated by DALL-E 2, from the prompt "Teddy bears working on new AI research underwater with 1990s technology"

author =

developer = OpenAI

released =

latest release version = DALL-E 3

latest release date =

replaced_by = GPT Image 1

repo =

programming language =

operating system =

genre = Text-to-image model

platform = Cloud computing platforms

license = Proprietary service

}}

DALL-E, DALL-E 2, and DALL-E 3 (stylised DALL·E) are text-to-image models developed by OpenAI using deep learning methodologies to generate digital images from natural language descriptions known as prompts.

The first version of DALL-E was announced in January 2021. In the following year, its successor DALL-E 2 was released. DALL-E 3 was released natively into ChatGPT for ChatGPT Plus and ChatGPT Enterprise customers in October 2023, In March 2025, DALL-E-3 was replaced in ChatGPT by GPT Image 1's native image-generation capabilities.

History and background

DALL-E was revealed by OpenAI in a blog post on 5 January 2021, and uses a version of GPT-3

Technology

The first generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) model was initially developed by OpenAI in 2018,

A trained CLIP pair is used to filter a larger initial list of images generated by DALL-E to select the image that is closest to the text prompt.

Capabilities

DALL-E can generate imagery in multiple styles, including photorealistic imagery, paintings, and emoji. However, DALL-E 3 continues to disproportionally represent people as White, female, and youthful. Users are able to somewhat remedy this through more specific prompts for image generation.

A concern about DALL-E 2 and similar image generation models is that they could be used to propagate deepfakes and other forms of misinformation. legal concerns have been raised regarding who owns those images.

In 2023 Microsoft pitched the United States Department of Defense to use DALL-E models to train battlefield management systems. In January 2024 OpenAI removed its blanket ban on military and warfare use from its usage policies.

Reception

Most coverage of DALL-E focuses on a small subset of "surreal"

See also

Artificial intelligence art

DeepDream

GPT Image 1

Runway

Recraft

Imagen

Midjourney

Stable Diffusion

Prompt engineering

References

{{Reflist|refs=

}}

External links

. The original report on DALL-E.

DALL-E 3 System Card

DALL-E 3 paper by OpenAI

DALL-E 2 website

Craiyon website

Category:Artificial intelligence art

Category:Text-to-image generation

Category:Deep learning software applications

Category:Unsupervised learning

Category:Generative pre-trained transformers

Category:2021 software

Category:ChatGPT

Category:2021 in artificial intelligence