{{Infobox software

title =

name = NovelAI

logo = NovelAI Logo.svg

logo size =

screenshot = NovelAI-TextGeneration-MainPage.png

collapsible = yes

collapsetext = Screenshot

caption = A screenshot of the main text generation page in May 2025

developer = Anlatan and text-to-image synthesis, with the image generation feature being implemented later on October 3, 2022.

Features

NovelAI uses GPT-based large language models (LLMs) to generate storywriting and prose. It has several models, such as Calliope, Sigurd, Euterpe, Krake, and Genji, with Genji being a Japanese-language model. The service also offers encrypted servers and customizable editors.

For AI art generation, which generates images from text prompts, NovelAI uses a custom version of the source-available Stable Diffusion dataset.

NovelAI is also capable of generating a new image based on an existing image.

On June 15, 2021, Anlatan released their finetuned GPT-Neo-2.7B model from EleutherAI named Calliope, after the Greek Muses. A day later, they released their Opus-exclusive GPT-J-6B finetuned model named Sigurd, for new LLM model inferencing and training.

On April 1, 2023, Anlatan added ControlNet features to their text-to-image NovelAI Diffusion model.

On May 16, 2023, Anlatan announced that they named their H100 cluster Shoggy, a reference to H.P. Lovecraft's Shoggoths, which was used to pre-train an undisclosed 8192 token context LLM in-house model.

Reception and controversy

diffusion model, depicting a dragon in a forest]]

Following the implementation of image generation, NovelAI became a widely-discussed topic in Japan, with some online commentators noting that its image synthesis features are very adept at producing close impressions of anime characters, while others have expressed concern that it is a paid service reliant on a diffusion model, while the original machine learning training data consists of images used without the consent of the original artists.

FayerWayer described NovelAI as a service capable of generating hentai. Manga artist Izumi Ū commented that while the manga style art generated by NovelAI is highly accurate, there are still imperfections in the output, although he views these as human-like in a favourable light nonetheless.

In response to the topic of NovelAI, Narugami, founder of the Japanese freelance artist commissioning website Skeb, stated on October 5, 2022 that the use of AI image generation is prohibited on the platform since 2018. Illustrations using NovelAI have been posted on social media and illustration posting sites, and by October 13, 2,111 works tagged with #NovelAI were posted on Pixiv. Pixiv has stated that it is not considering a complete elimination of creations that use AI, though it requires AI-generated posts to be marked as such and allows users to filter them out.

Incidents

On October 6, 2022, NovelAI experienced a data breach where its software's source code was leaked.

See also

AI Dungeon

CHAI

Character.ai

DALL-E

DreamBooth

Midjourney

Replika

Stable Diffusion

References

{{reflist|refs=

}}

External links

Category:2021 software

Category:Anime and manga fandom

Category:Deep learning software applications

Category:Text-to-image generation

Category:Unsupervised learning

Category:Works involved in plagiarism controversies

Category:Art controversies

Category:Internet leaks