Spatial embedding is one of feature learning techniques used in spatial analysis where points, lines, polygons or other spatial data types. representing geographic locations are mapped to vectors of real numbers. Conceptually it involves a mathematical embedding from a space with many dimensions per geographic object to a continuous vector space with a much lower dimension.

Such embedding methods allow complex spatial data to be used in neural networks and have been shown to improve performance in spatial analysis tasks

Embedded data types

Geographic data can take many forms: text, images, graphs, trajectories, polygons. Depending on the task, there may be a need to combine multimodal data from different sources. The next section describes examples of different types of data and their uses.

Text

Geolocated posts on social media can be used to acquire a library of documents bound to a given place that can be later transformed to embedded vectors using word embedding techniques. - generating personalized point of interest recommendations based on user preferences.

Next/future location prediction - prediction of the next location a person will go to based on their historical trajectory.

Zone functions classification - estimation of crime rate in different regions of a city.

Local event detection - predicting estimated travel time given current traffic conditions and special occurring events.

Time estimation for on-demand food delivery - estimation of delivery time when placing an order through the website.

Temporal aspect

Some of the data analyzed has a timestamp associated with it. In some cases of data analysis this information is omitted and in others it is used to divide the set into groups. The most common division is the separation of weekdays from weekends or division into hours of the day. This is particularly important in the analysis of mobility data, because the characteristics of mobility during the week and at different times of the day are very different from each other. Another area in which time division into, for example, individual months can be used is in the analysis of tourism of a given region. In order to take such a split into account, embedding methods treat the time stamp specifically or separate versions of the model are developed for different subgroups of the analyzed set.

References

Category:Machine learning

Category:Data mining

Category:Spatial analysis